# status=ABSTRACT_ONLY pmid=27102484 pmcid= ident=27102484

27102484 2016 05 10 2022 03 18 1095-9203 352 6284 2016 Apr 22 Science (New York, N.Y.) Science Hobit and Blimp1 instruct a universal transcriptional program of tissue residency in lymphocytes. 459 463 459-63 10.1126/science.aad2035 Tissue-resident memory T (Trm) cells permanently localize to portals of pathogen entry, where they provide immediate protection against reinfection. To enforce tissue retention, Trm cells up-regulate CD69 and down-regulate molecules associated with tissue egress; however, a Trm-specific transcriptional regulator has not been identified. Here, we show that the transcription factor Hobit is specifically up-regulated in Trm cells and, together with related Blimp1, mediates the development of Trm cells in skin, gut, liver, and kidney in mice. The Hobit-Blimp1 transcriptional module is also required for other populations of tissue-resident lymphocytes, including natural killer T (NKT) cells and liver-resident NK cells, all of which share a common transcriptional program. Our results identify Hobit and Blimp1 as central regulators of this universal program that instructs tissue retention in diverse tissue-resident lymphocyte populations. Copyright &#xa9; 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Mackay Laura K LK Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. lkmackay@unimelb.edu.au kallies@wehi.edu.au k.vangisbergen@sanquin.nl. Minnich Martina M Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria. Kragten Natasja A M NA Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Liao Yang Y The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Nota Benjamin B Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Seillet Cyril C The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Zaid Ali A Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Man Kevin K The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Preston Simon S The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Freestone David D Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Braun Asolina A Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Wynne-Jones Erica E Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Behr Felix M FM Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Experimental Immunology, AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Stark Regina R Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Pellicci Daniel G DG Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Godfrey Dale I DI Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Belz Gabrielle T GT The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Pellegrini Marc M The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Gebhardt Thomas T Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. Busslinger Meinrad M Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria. Shi Wei W The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Carbone Francis R FR Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia. van Lier Ren&#xe9; A W RA Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Kallies Axel A The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. lkmackay@unimelb.edu.au kallies@wehi.edu.au k.vangisbergen@sanquin.nl. van Gisbergen Klaas P J M KP Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Department of Experimental Immunology, AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands. lkmackay@unimelb.edu.au kallies@wehi.edu.au k.vangisbergen@sanquin.nl. eng Journal Article Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't United States Science 0404511 0036-8075 0 Prdm1 protein, mouse 0 Transcription Factors 0 Zfp683 protein, mouse EC 2.1.1.- Positive Regulatory Domain I-Binding Factor 1 IM Nat Rev Immunol. 2016 Jun;16(6):338-9. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.61. 27180814 Animals Gastrointestinal Tract immunology Gene Expression Regulation Genes, Regulator genetics physiology Immunologic Memory genetics Kidney immunology Killer Cells, Natural immunology Liver immunology Lymphocyte Activation Mice Mice, Knockout Natural Killer T-Cells immunology Positive Regulatory Domain I-Binding Factor 1 Skin immunology Transcription Factors genetics physiology Transcription, Genetic Up-Regulation 2015 8 10 2016 3 21 2016 4 23 6 0 2016 4 23 6 0 2016 5 11 6 0 ppublish 27102484 10.1126/science.aad2035 352/6284/459