# status=OA_FULLTEXT pmid=32544459 pmcid=PMC7295478 ident=32544459

3815 pheelsevier Cell Host & Microbe Cell Host Microbe PMC7295478 7295478 7295478 32544459 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.014 

## BCG Vaccination in Humans Elicits Trained Immunity via the Hematopoietic Progenitor Compartment
 Cirovic Branko de Bree L Charlotte J Groh Laszlo Blok Bas A Chan Joyce van der Velden Walter JFM Bremmers MEJ van Crevel Reinout Händler Kristian Picelli Simone Schulte-Schrepping Jonas Klee Kathrin Oosting Marije Koeken Valerie ACM van Ingen Jakko Li Yang Benn Christine S Schultze Joachim L Joosten Leo AB Curtis Nigel Netea Mihai G Schlitzer Andreas 1 Quantitative Systems Biology, Life & Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany 2 Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS) and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6526 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands 3 Research Center for Vitamins and Vaccines, Bandim Health Project, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Odense Patient Data Explorative Network, University of Southern Denmark/Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark 5 Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne & Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, The Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 6 Department of Haematology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands 7 Single Cell Genomics and Epigenomics Unit at the German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the University of Bonn, 53175 Bonn, Germany 8 Genomics and Immunoregulation, Life & Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany 9 Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands 10 Centre for Individualised Infection Medicine (CiiM) & TWINCORE, joint ventures between the Helmholtz-Centre for Infection Research (HZI) and the Hannover Medical School (MHH), 30625 Hannover, Germany 11 Immunology and Metabolism, Life & Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany ∗ Corresponding author mihai.netea@radboudumc.nl 
 ∗∗ Corresponding author andreas.schlitzer@uni-bonn.de 
 12 These authors contributed equally
 13 Lead Contact
 15 6 2020 28 2 322 322–334.e5 16 6 2020 © 2020 Elsevier Inc. Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active. 

## Summary
 Induction of trained immunity by Bacille-Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination mediates beneficial heterologous effects, but the mechanisms underlying its persistence and magnitude remain elusive. In this study, we show that BCG vaccination in healthy human volunteers induces a persistent transcriptional program connected to myeloid cell development and function within the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) compartment in the bone marrow. We identify hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) family members 1a and b as crucial regulators of this transcriptional shift. These findings are corroborated by higher granulocyte numbers in BCG-vaccinated infants, HNF1 SNP variants that correlate with trained immunity, and elevated serum concentrations of the HNF1 target alpha-1 antitrypsin. Additionally, transcriptomic HSPC remodeling was epigenetically conveyed to peripheral CD14 + monocytes, displaying an activated transcriptional signature three months after BCG vaccination. Taken together, transcriptomic, epigenomic, and functional reprogramming of HSPCs and peripheral monocytes is a hallmark of BCG-induced trained immunity in humans.
 Keywords: BCG, vaccination, trained immunity, myelopoiesis, hematopoietic stem cells, monocyte, myeloid cell, epigenetic imprinting

## Graphical Abstract

## Highlights
 • Human BCG vaccination induces a persistent innate immune training of CD14 + monocytes
 • BCG vaccination imprints a persistent transcriptomic myeloid bias on human HSPCs
 • Hepatic nuclear factors are regulators of BCG-induced trained immunity in HSPCs
 • BCG induces persistent epigenetic changes in peripheral CD14 + monocytes
 
 Cirovic and de Bree et al. investigate the effects of BCG vaccination in humans and reveal the induction of a transcriptomic rewiring of human stem and progenitor cells toward the myeloid cell lineage, instructed by hepatic nuclear factors, resulting in epigenetic and functional changes within CD14 + peripheral monocytes.

 status released display-pdf yes is-in-collection-domain yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2020 Feb 13; Revised 2020 Apr 16; Accepted 2020 May 12; Issue date 2020 Aug 12.

## Introduction
 Recent studies have shown that the ability to functionally adapt immune responses after an initial insult is not an exclusive property of adaptive immune cells, such as B and T cells, but is also found in a variety of innate immune cells, such as myeloid cells and natural killer (NK) cells ( , ). The functional adaptation of innate immunity after a primary insult, such as an infection or vaccination, represents a de facto innate immune memory, also termed trained immunity. This leads to a more effective non-specific (heterologous) response to a secondary insult, independently of the initial antigen ( ). Epidemiological studies have shown that many vaccines, especially those employing attenuated live microorganisms, such as Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), measles, or oral polio vaccine, lead to a decrease in overall childhood mortality that cannot be solely attributed to protection against the target disease alone ( , , ).
 Among these vaccines, BCG has been shown to reduce neonatal mortality by 38% (17%–54%) in high infectious pressure environments ( , ). Furthermore, BCG has been associated with sustained beneficial effects in older children ( ) and adults ( , ). In experimental models, BCG vaccination provides heterologous protection against a broad range of infections such as C. albicans or S. aureus infections ( , , , ). It is suggested that this protective effect is mediated by a BCG-induced increase in the function of innate immune cells, including higher pro-inflammatory cytokine responses to secondary unrelated pathogens. This process is mediated by transcriptomic and epigenetic changes of myeloid cells, such as monocytes and macrophages ( , ). BCG-mediated innate immune memory has been shown to be conveyed by monocytes; however, how the persistent memory function of myeloid cells, which has been shown to last months and even years after initial vaccination, is established remained elusive ( , ), especially considering the limited lifetime of myeloid cells in the circulation. Recently, two studies have addressed this conundrum in the mouse, by showing that systemic BCG vaccination or injection of the fungal cell wall component β-glucan induces a myeloid differentiation bias at the level of the hematopoietic stem cell within the bone marrow (BM), resulting in an increased release of monocytes and their enhanced ability to secrete cytokines and kill pathogens ( , , ). However, whether similar processes are induced by intradermal BCG vaccination in humans is unknown.
 In this study, we used a human in vivo vaccination model to assess whether BCG vaccination of healthy individuals leads to epigenetic, transcriptional, and functional changes in BM hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) and circulating monocytes. Furthermore, we investigated the molecular consequences of innate immune memory induction by BCG vaccination, identifying hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1a and b as crucial regulators of innate immune memory formation induced by BCG vaccination in humans in vivo .

## Results

## Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells Release More Pro-inflammatory Cytokines 3 Months after Intradermal BCG Vaccination upon C. albicans Restimulation
 In order to fully understand the mechanisms of induction and the longevity of the enhanced heterologous innate immune response observed after BCG vaccination, we vaccinated 15 healthy BCG-naive volunteers with BCG, while 5 volunteers received placebo. On day 0, 14, and 90 (D0, D14, and D90) after vaccination (or placebo) we prepared peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). BM aspirates were collected and enriched for the mononuclear cell fraction (MNC) on D0 and D90 post-vaccination ( 
A). All vaccinated individuals developed a local scar, and none had complications of vaccination ( 
). No complication related to the vaccination was observed (e.g., lymphadenitis or abscess formation). Volunteers tested negative for the presence of M. bovis (the mycobacterial species from which BCG is derived) in the BM, 90 days after vaccination (data not shown). In order to validate the robustness of our in vivo  BCG vaccination study approach we restimulated PBMCs isolated on D0, D14, and D90 post-BCG or placebo vaccination with C. albicans and measured the release of interferon alpha (IFNA), gamma (IFNG), interleukin 10 (IL10), 1B (IL1B), 6 (IL6), interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL1RA), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) ( B). As previously demonstrated in several studies ( , , , , , ), BCG vaccination induced functional changes in PBMCs characterized by increased cytokine production after 24 h, compared with D0 and the placebo-treated group, specifically the functional and mechanistic hallmark cytokine IL1B ( ) was markedly upregulated upon restimulation with C. albicans ( B; ), thus validating our study setup in regard to the induction of heterologous innate immunity by BCG vaccination. Furthermore, also IL6 showed an increase however missed significance.
 To further reveal whether these functional differences are also reflected within the transcriptome of the complete fraction of the PBMC, we investigated the pathways which were differentially regulated after BCG vaccination of individuals upon restimulation, using mRNA sequencing and subsequent gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). First, we assessed the changes in the placebo group: They have not been found to be significant between D0 and D90 in placebo-treated individuals. Therefore, we conclude that one BM aspiration does not induce long-term changes in transcriptional program of PBMCs. In contrast, GSEA of C. albicans -restimulated PBMCs from BCG-vaccinated individuals before (D0) and after (D90) vaccination showed a significant enrichment of pathways related to IFNA and IFNG response signaling ( C and 1D), implying a heightened activation status of cells contained within the PBMC fraction, consistent with the significant increase in IL1B release and the trend toward a higher production of IFNα and G. These unbiased global transcriptomic and functional data suggest a transcriptomic basis for the enhanced innate immune response elicited by BCG vaccination.

## BCG Vaccination Does Not Elicit Cellular Changes within the BM or Peripheral Blood in Healthy Volunteers 3 Months after Vaccination
 The BCG-induced increase in IL1B from the PBMC suggests the possibility of a remodeled myeloid cell and progenitor compartment as the cellular basis for trained immunity. To address this, we investigated the composition of the PBMC and the BM MNC populations of BCG-vaccinated and BCG-naive individuals on D0, D14, and D90 post-vaccination using differential white blood cell counts and multi-color flow cytometry. Differential blood count analysis did not reveal significant differences between the BCG-vaccinated and BCG-naive group within neutrophils, total lymphocytes or monocyte counts ( 
A). As differential blood counts do not segregate between different mononuclear phagocyte subsets within the PBMCs, we utilized flow cytometry to investigate classical monocytes (cMono), intermediate monocytes (intMono), non-classical monocytes (ncMono), conventional dendritic cells (cDC) 1 and 2 alongside pre-DCs, pDCs and the peripheral blood resident CD34 + progenitor fraction ( B, 2C, A, and S1B). However, no significant alteration of the cellular frequencies between D0 and D90 in BCG-vaccinated or placebo-treated individuals could be detected over the time of the study period within the PBMC fraction, recapitulating the results of the differential blood counts. Similarly, we monitored the evolution of the myeloid mature cell and progenitor compartment in MNCs of the BM by tracking cMono, ncMono, intMono, total cDC, pDC, pre-DC, myeloid erythroid progenitors (MEPs), common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMPs), multi-lymphoid progenitors (MLPs), multi-potent progenitors (MPPs), and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) on D0 and D90 post-vaccination ( D, 2E, C, and S1D). Again, no significant changes could be detected in the frequencies of any of these populations between D0 and D90 in vaccinated or placebo-treated individuals. Taken together, these data indicate that human trained immunity induced by intradermal BCG vaccination is not accompanied by changes in the frequencies of the mature myeloid or myeloid progenitor populations within the peripheral blood or BM MNC compartment of adult healthy volunteers during steady state.

## BCG Vaccination Induces a Myeloid-Associated Transcriptomic Signature 90 Days after BCG Vaccination in BM HSPCs of Healthy Volunteers
 Recent murine studies have shown that systemic BCG vaccination induced transcriptional and functional changes at the level of the HSPCs ( , ). Therefore, we hypothesized that similar mechanisms might play a role in inducing human innate immune training in circulating monocytes 90 days post-intradermal BCG vaccination in human healthy volunteers. To investigate whether intradermal BCG vaccination-induced systemic innate immune memory is indeed mediated by transcriptional and functional remodeling of the human BM progenitor compartment, we purified HSPCs from BM aspirates using flow cytometry on day 0 and 90 post-vaccination from BCG-vaccinated and placebo-treated individuals and performed a global transcriptome analysis ( A and C for sorting scheme; ). Global distance measurement of transcript abundance between samples at D90 detected a subset of BCG-vaccinated individuals with a different transcriptomic makeup than the placebo-treated group, thus identifying overall transcriptomic differences between BCG-vaccinated and placebo-treated individuals 90 days after vaccination ( A). In order to further understand these differences, we directly compared the transcriptome of HSPCs isolated from the same individuals on D0 and D90 post-BCG vaccination ( B). This analysis revealed an upregulation of genes associated to myeloid and granulocytic cell lineage priming (such as C-X3-C motif chemokine receptor 1 [ CX3CR1 ], macrophage-expressed 1 [ MPEG1 ], interferon regulatory factor 4 [ IRF4 ], and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein delta [ CEBPD ]; , ), and function (such as macrophage receptor with collagenous structure [ MARCO ], IL 1 receptor type 1 [ IL1R1 ], type 2 [ IL1R2 ], S100 calcium-binding protein A8 [ S100A8 ], A9 [ S100A9 ], A12 [ S100A12 ], and serpin family A member 1 [ SERPINA1 ]; , , , ) ( B; ). These data indicated that BCG vaccination induces the upregulation of myeloid and granulocytic lineage-associated transcripts at the level of the HSPC, indicating the potential for a skewed myeloid development bias within healthy vaccinated individuals 90 days post-vaccination.

## BCG Vaccination Upregulates Transcriptomic Networks Associated with Neutrophil and Mononuclear Phagocyte Development and Function 90 Days after Vaccination
 To validate a myeloid-skewed signature within HSPCs as found by inspection of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) ( B), we performed an unbiased Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (GOEA) on the upregulated DEGs within HSPCs before and 90 days after BCG vaccination ( 
A).
 This analysis identified pathways, such as “granulocyte activation,” “neutrophil mediated immunity,” and “positive regulation of response to external stimulus,” among others, to be significantly enriched ( A, 4B, and A; ). Network-level analysis of the enriched pathways found by GOEA revealed a dense topological clustering of the neutrophil-associated pathways (ontology terms a–e) and the pathways associated with regulation of immune responses (ontology terms f–j), indicating overlap in the genes contributing to the enrichment of these GO terms within the D90 HSPC transcriptome of BCG-vaccinated individuals ( B).
 Gene-level analysis of the upregulated “neutrophil pathway genes” as revealed by GOEA indicated upregulation of important genes involved in the development and function of neutrophils, such as SERPINA1 , S100A12 , S100A9 , galectin 3 ( LGALS3 ), and lysozyme ( LYZ ) ( C). Additionally, the pathway “positive regulation of response to external stimulus” within the day 90 BCG-vaccinated HSPC transcriptome revealed significant upregulation of transcripts associated with myeloid cell function, such as TNF , complement C3a receptor 1 ( C3AR1 ), C-C motif chemokine receptor 2 ( CCR2 ), and the gamma chain of the Fc epsilon receptor ( FCER1G ) ( A). Furthermore, inspection of DEG related to the term “signaling receptor activity” (GO:0004872) showed upregulation of genes important for myeloid cell activation and function in HSPC in individuals 90 days after BCG vaccination, including the C-type lectin domain containing 7A ( CLEC7A ) and C-type lectin domain family 4 member G ( CLEC4G ) and the cytokine receptors IL1R1 , interleukin 7 receptor ( IL7R ), interleukin 10 receptor subunit alpha ( IL10RA ), and interleukin 18 receptor accessory protein ( IL18RAP ) ( D). Filtering of DEG according to the biological process term “DNA-binding transcription factor (TF) activity” (GO:0003700) revealed several upregulated myeloid cell-associated TFs, such as HNF1 homeobox A and HNF1 homeobox B ( HNF1A / B ), IRF4 , and CEBPD , that serve as potential candidates driving the process of trained immunity on a gene-regulatory level ( B).
 To decipher the functional consequences of the transcriptional reprogramming of the HSPC, we investigated whether there is an effect of BCG vaccination on granulocyte numbers in a significantly larger cohort of vaccinated children. The relatively small number of volunteers from whom we could collect BM aspirates, and the biological variation in cell counts in the current trial, did not permit to reach statistical significance for the differences in cell populations after BCG vaccination (see above). Therefore, we compared neutrophil numbers in the MIS BAIR cohort of 1,200 infants randomized to receive either BCG or no BCG shortly after birth (clinical trial registration NCT01906853 ). As shown in E, within days of randomization, BCG-vaccinated infants had significantly clinically relevant higher numbers of neutrophils in the circulation compared with BCG-naive infants, thereby adding weight to the hypothesis that BCG vaccination skews the myeloid lineage toward granulopoeisis ( E; ).

## HNF1A and HNF1B Regulate the Induction of BCG-Elicited Innate Immune Training in Human HSPCs 90 Days Post-Vaccination
 To reveal factors that guard the induction of the regulatory gene networks leading to the expression of genes associated with human innate immune memory, myeloid cell fate, and the increase in circulating neutrophils, we used gene sets associated with distinct cis -regulatory TF-binding motifs on ranked gene lists according to expression fold change in HSPCs from D0 to D90 and applied GSEA ( 
A). This analysis indicated a significant enrichment of a set of genes associated with TF-binding motifs related to HNF1, homeobox A4 (HOXA4), GATA-binding proteins, growth factor independent 1 transcriptional repressor (GFI1), and visual system homeobox 2 (VSX2), defined by the CHX10 motif, TFs ( A). Visualizing the leading-edge genes matching significant genes with binding motifs for the TFs identified in A indicated important factors involved in myeloid cell development, such as LGALS2 , glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit ( G6PC ), interleukin 1 receptor accessory protein like 1 ( IL1RAPL1 ), bone morphogenetic protein 1 ( BMP4 ), and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 3 ( CXCL3 ) ( B).
 The two TFs with the highest significance predicted by GSEA, alongside a robust upregulation within the transcriptome of HSPCs day 90 post-vaccination, were HNF1A and HNF1B ( B and A), which are known to be expressed in the liver, but also in myeloid cells ( ). Furthermore, HNF1A/B and their target genes SERPINA10 and SERPIN1A were found to be upregulated 90 post-BCG vaccination in HSPCs of BCG-vaccinated individuals ( B and C). We therefore hypothesized that HNF1A/B may be involved in the induction of trained immunity, and we initiated genetic validation in a cohort of 141 healthy individuals (200FG cohort from the human functional genomics project) in which an ex vivo trained immunity model was applied using either BCG or β-glucan as inducers ( ). Indeed, polymorphisms in both HNF1A and HNF1B significantly influenced the induction of trained immunity as indicated by significant differences in the potential to release IL6 and/or TNF after restimulation with LPS in vitro ( C and 5D; ). Furthermore, looking at genetic variants present at specific sites within the HNF1A locus (marked pink and bright blue in C) revealed that specific SNP variants are associated with more or less TNF production after BCG-induced training ex vivo ( D). Furthermore, also polymorphisms in the other indicated TFs associated with motifs identified earlier ( A), such as GATA2 / 3 , GFI1 / 1B alongside HOXA4 , and visual system homeobox 1 ( VSX1 ) were shown to influence the β-glucan or BCG-mediated induction of innate immune memory ( A).
 One of the target genes of HNF1A is SERPINA1 , coding for the acute phase protein α-1-antitrypsin (AAT) ( ), which was found to be upregulated within the transcriptome of the HSPC 90 days after BCG vaccination ( B and C). To validate the functional consequences of this finding, we tested whether there is a correlation between circulating AAT concentrations and the strength of induction of innate immune memory using enhanced IL1B production as an indicator of successful innate immune memory induction. We measured serum AAT levels at D0 and D90 post-vaccination and correlated this concentration with the fold changes of IL1B induction in PBMCs restimulated ex vivo with C. albicans in BCG-vaccinated and non-vaccinated individuals after 90 days. As shown in E, the serum concentration of AAT correlated with enhanced IL1B production within restimulated PBMCs ( B), further supporting the hypothesis that a HNF1-controlled transcriptomic network is implicated in the induction of human innate immune memory. To directly test the effect of AAT on BCG-induced innate immune training on the cellular level, we isolated healthy PBMC-derived monocytes and incubated these cells with BCG in the presence of either AAT or serum-derived albumin (as control protein) ( B and S3C). After training for 24 h, the stimuli were washed off, and monocytes were rested for 5 days. On day 6 after training with BCG (with or without AAT), we restimulated the cells with E. coli -derived LPS and measured IL6 and TNF secretion 24 h later. AAT decreased trained immunity induced by BCG, especially IL6 production ( C). These data establish a regulatory role of AAT on the development of BCG-induced innate immune training ex vivo and point toward a negative regulatory role of AAT in vivo , balancing the development of innate immune training in humans.
 To identify molecules which would allow prediction of individuals with the potential to mount an efficient innate immune training response, we performed an Olink-targeted proteomics analysis investigating the expression of 92 plasma proteins prior BCG vaccination and correlated it with the ex vivo PBMC cytokine release for IL1B and IL6 in response to C. albicans D14 or D90 post-BCG vaccination. Here, increased baseline (D0) plasma levels of CCL23 significantly correlated with trained immunity responses, as assessed by the fold increase of IL1B production in PBMC restimulated ex vivo with C. albicans 14 days post-BCG vaccination ( D). Furthermore, these analyses revealed that baseline plasma concentrations of CCL20 (a predicted target of HNF1A [TRANSFAC]) positively correlated with the ability to release increased amounts of IL6 in PBMCs restimulated ex vivo with C. albicans 14 days post-BCG vaccination ( E). Prior analysis has shown that neutrophil-mediated gene programs are activated 90 days post-vaccination with BCG and an increase in neutrophil counts in children days after BCG vaccination. This notion of increased granulopoesis was further supported by the fact that plasma levels of S100A12, a crucial neutrophil derived anti-microbial effector, significantly correlated with the increase in PBMC-derived IL6 release 90 days post ex vivo C. albicans challenge ( F). No other correlations were found between the rest of the inflammatory mediators and the induction of trained immunity. Thus, these data reveal HNF1A and HNF1B as crucial regulators of BCG-induced innate immune memory formation in human resting HSPCs 90 days post-vaccination.

## BCG Vaccination Induces Persistent Epigenetic Changes Associated with Inflammation in Peripheral CD14 + Monocytes
 Functional investigation of C. albicans -restimulated PBMCs revealed a higher capacity of blood borne cells to produce and release IL1B 90 days after BCG vaccination ( ) ( B). Therefore, we hypothesized that innate immune memory induction is reflected within the epigenome of the major effector cell type within the PBMC, i.e., CD14 + monocytes, during homeostasis. To investigate this, we assessed the differential chromatin accessibility of CD14 + monocytes from BCG-vaccinated individuals before and 90 days after vaccination using the assay for transposase accessible chromatin by ATAC sequencing (ATAC-seq) ( A and 4B; ). PCA of all present peaks segregated CD14 + monocytes isolated at day 0 and day 90 post-BCG vaccination indicating a clear role for regulation at the level of DNA accessibility ( A and C). Analysis of the genes associated to the core set of the top 47 differentially accessible peaks (robust to multiple testing correction) between day 0 and 90 post-BCG vaccination showed increased DNA accessibility in the proximity of various inflammation-associated genes, such as collagen type XXII alpha 1 chain ( COL22A1 ) ( , ), C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 6 ( CXCL6 ) ( , ) and retinol-binding protein 4 ( RBP4 ) ( ) in homeostatic CD14 + monocytes 90 days post-vaccination ( B, 6C, and D; and ). On the other hand, peaks associated to genes involved in retinoic acid-induced immune tolerance (retinoic acid receptor alpha [ RARA ]) ( , , ), lymphoid development (PR/SET domain 1 [ PRDM1 ]) ( ), and inactive nuclear factor kappa B subunit 2 ( NFKB2 ) ( , ) showed a diminished signal 90 days post-BCG vaccination in CD14 + monocytes ( B, E, and S4F). We then asked which HSPC-associated transcriptomic changes can be found in the epigenome of CD14 + monocytes and intersected the genes found to be differentially regulated within the HSPC of BCG-vaccinated individuals 90 days post-vaccination with ATAC-seq peaks within promoter regions in CD14 + monocytes. Interestingly, among the promoter regions associated with more open regions of genes upregulated within the transcriptome of HSPCs, we identified again CXCL6 , CLEC17A , PTGIR , and STAT6 to be conserved from the HSPC transcriptome to the CD14 + monocyte epigenome ( D). Vice versa, loci associated to myeloid development and lineage priming, such as CEBPG , TNFRSF12A , and CXCR4 and to cell proliferation, such as CDK4 and CDK6 were closed down in the epigenome of CD14 + monocytes. Furthermore, hierarchical clustering of the normalized peak reads falling within promoters of genes that were transcriptionally upregulated in HSPCs revealed a clear stratification of the epigenetic makeup in monocytes before and after vaccination ( D). In conclusion, these analyses show that transcriptomic changes induced by BCG vaccination within the HSPC are epigenetically perpetrated toward the major PBMC-derived effector cells, i.e., CD14 + monocytes, at least in part through regulation of the DNA accessibility of certain inflammation-associated loci. This allows for a persistent induction of a trained immunity phenotype of CD14 + monocytes, beyond the individual cell’s lifespan.

## Discussion
 In this study, we demonstrate that human in vivo BCG vaccination induces sustained transcriptomic changes in HSPCs of healthy individuals, changes that are accompanied by persistent increase of innate immune cells responsiveness to heterologous stimuli. BCG vaccination was associated with a rewiring of transcriptional programs of HSPCs toward myelopoiesis. The physiological relevance of this shift was validated by the higher neutrophil counts within days of BCG vaccination observed in a randomized clinical trial of BCG vaccination in newborn infants and by the increased responsiveness of PBMCs to stimulation with unrelated bacterial and fungal stimuli ex vivo .
 These findings are important at several levels. First, the demonstration of these effects of BCG vaccination in vivo at the level of human BM-resident HSPC provides the mechanistic explanation for the persistent effects of BCG vaccination on circulating innate immune cells and for the many epidemiological observations of beneficial non-specific effects of BCG years after vaccination ( , , , ). These effects on HSPCs are accompanied by a clinically relevant and significant increase in the number of neutrophils in infants vaccinated with BCG, constituting a part of the functional basis for the non-specific clinical effects of BCG vaccination ( , ). The conclusion of a myeloid differentiation bias within the HSPCs induced by BCG vaccination is supported by recent studies in murine models in which trained immunity was induced by systemic BCG administration ( ) or β-glucan administration ( ), in which similar changes within the murine myeloid precursor cascade were observed.
 Second, important insights have been obtained on the mechanisms responsible for the induction of trained immunity in humans. Thus, we demonstrate that BCG vaccination is accompanied by important changes at the level of chromatin accessibility in CD14 + monocytes, and that CD14 + monocytes before and 90 days after vaccination can be segregated on the basis of the patterns of DNA accessibility. The epigenetic changes within CD14 + monocytes relate to those found at the level of the transcriptome within HSPCs, revealing a crucial mechanism of innate immune memory imprinting across cell lineages ( , ).
 Third, an important focus of this study was to identify pathways that mediate induction of a trained immunity phenotype. By intersecting the list of TFs that were upregulated in HSPCs after vaccination, with that of gene sets associated with specific TF motifs significantly enriched after vaccination, we identified HNF1A and HNF1B as master regulators of trained immunity. In earlier studies HNF1A/B have been shown to directly transactivate both the gene activity and chromatin structure of SERPINA1 either by rearrangement of histone modifications or the recruitment of other co-factors ( , ). HNF1A / B are highly expressed in the liver and myeloid cells, especially in response to acute inflammation ( ). The hypothesis that HNF1 family TFs are important for the induction of trained immunity was subsequently validated in the 200FG cohort of healthy volunteers from the human functional genomics project, in which trained immunity was induced in an ex vivo model by either β-glucan or BCG: polymorphisms in both HNF1A and HNF1B modulated the induction of trained immunity. HNF TFs regulate transcription of numerous genes important for host defense, including several acute phase proteins such as α-1-antitrypsin (AAT, SERPINA1) ( ). In an independent validation effort, we measured AAT-circulating concentrations and demonstrate a strong correlation between AAT-circulating concentrations and the induction of trained immunity. Subsequently, using the OLink plasma screening technology we identified the baseline plasma levels of S100A12, CCL23, and the putative HNF1A target gene CCL20 as predictive biomarkers of “trained immunity induction.” These observations further strengthen the role of the HNF1A/B axis in regulating the induction of human trained immunity.
 Finally, these data provide a resource for potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets based on trained immunity. It would be important to study whether other live vaccines that have been associated with beneficial non-specific effects induce similar changes ( ). Current efforts are ongoing to identify potential trained immunity correlates of protection during BCG vaccination, which could lead to an acceleration of TB vaccine development and to its deployment against other pathogens. In this respect, we have earlier demonstrated that BCG vaccination can protect against human experimental infections with viruses ( ) and parasites ( ). Currently, several clinical trials in the Netherlands, Australia, and Greece investigate the capacity of BCG vaccination to prevent infection with the new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 ( NCT04328441 , NCT04327206 , and NCT04339712 [ www.clinicaltrials.gov ]). Similarly, trained immunity has been proposed to represent a new avenue for immunotherapy in cancer ( ) and to contribute to the pathophysiology of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases ( , ). Our study reveals HNF-mediated processes as such a potential target but also provides a catalog of genes that characterize trained BM progenitors that can be targeted for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes.
 However, our study raises additional questions to be answered by future studies. How long does the HSPC reprogramming induced by BCG vaccination persist? Can this process be reversed? Indeed, epidemiological studies suggest that the beneficial effects of BCG vaccine on overall health can be offset by subsequent vaccination with the non-live diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine ( ). Another important aspect to be answered by future studies refers to the mediators that induce the trained immunity phenotype at the level of BM. One possibility is that release of peptidoglycans from the site of the vaccination would mediate through circulation the stimulation of BM progenitors. Initial data from another study suggest indeed that muramyl-dipeptide (a peptidoglycan component) concentrations after BCG vaccination increase (V. Mourits, personal communication), but whether this is associated with changes within the BM remains to be investigated. Another possibility is the release of endogenous mediators (e.g., cytokines) from the site of infection: Their assessment in the circulation in the first hours and days after vaccination should be investigated in future studies, as these early time points were not available in the current study.
 In conclusion, we provide evidence that in vivo BCG-induced trained innate immunity induces epigenetic, transcriptional, and functional changes in human BM-derived HSPCs and peripheral CD14 + monocytes. These effects at least partly explain the beneficial and persistent heterologous effects of BCG vaccination against infections as trained HSPCs can respond faster and more efficiently toward stress signals delivered e.g., by infections. These findings should lead to a strong impetus for further exploration of this process in order to identify targets for clinical vaccine development and therapeutic targeting of trained immunity.

## STAR★Methods

## Key Resources Table

## Resource Availability

## Lead Contact
 Further information and requests for reagents can be addressed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact Andreas Schlitzer ( andreas.schlitzer@uni-bonn.de ).

## Materials Availability
 This study did not generate new unique reagents

## Data and Code Availability
 RNA sequencing and ATAC data is available under GEO: GSE124220 . Human functional Genomics data is available through https://hfgp.bbmri.nl ( ). Scripts used to analyze these data will be shared upon request.

## Experimental Model and Subject Details

## Experimental Design
 This single-center randomized controlled trial was conducted at the Radboud university medical center (Nijmegen, The Netherlands) from January 2017 to July 2017. Prior to inclusion, volunteers were medically screened and provided written informed consent. The trial was approved by the Arnhem-Nijmegen Ethical Committee (approval number NL55825.091.15), and performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice. Twenty healthy, male and female, BCG-naive volunteers (age 18–50 years, no active infection, no detectable inflammatory signs, negative test result for the Quantiferon-TB Gold test) were included and randomly assigned to two groups: 15 subjects received standard dose (0.1ml of the reconstituted vaccine) of intradermal BCG vaccination (BCG Bulgaria, Intervax), and 5 received 0.1ml of vaccine diluent as a placebo control. One volunteer (assigned to the BCG-vaccinated group) has been replaced due to technical reasons during bone marrow aspiration. The 5 placebo controls were used to calibrate the cohort and establish baseline measurements and the effect of bone marrow aspiration, whereas the experimental cohort of 15 vaccinated volunteers was assessed and analyzed before and after vaccination. Blood was drawn before, two weeks after and three months after vaccination. At baseline and after three months, bone marrow was extracted by aspiration from the iliac crest by an experienced physician assistant after local anesthetics with lidocaine. 30 mL of bone marrow was aspirated in total and collected into two 20 mL syringes, prefilled with 5 ml (150 IE/ml) sodium heparin per syringe.

## Method Details

## Whole Blood Counts
 Complete blood counts were determined in EDTA whole blood using a Sysmex analyzer (XN-450)

## Mononuclear Cell Isolation and PBMC Stimulation
 Mononuclear cells from peripheral EDTA whole blood (PBMCs) and heparinized bone marrow (BM-MNCs) were isolated with Ficoll-Paque (GE healthcare, UK) density gradient separation. Cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), counted in a Coulter counter (Beckman Coulter, USA), and brought to concentration in Dutch modified RPMI medium (Roswell Park Memorial Institute; Invitrogen, CA, USA), supplemented with 50μg/ml gentamycine, 2 mM Glutamax (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and 1 mM pyruvate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). 5 x 10 5 PBMCs were cultured in a final volume of 200 μl / well in round bottom 96-well plates (Greiner Bio-one, Austria) and stimulated with RPMI, heat-killed Candida albicans (1 × 10 6 / ml, strain UC820). After 24 hours supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until measurements were performed.

## Ex Vivo BCG Induced Innate Immune Training
 To investigate the effects of AAT on BCG-induced trained immunity in vitro , a trained immunity model was used as previously described ( ). Buffy coats from healthy donors were obtained after written informed consent (Sanquin blood bank, Nijmegen, The Netherlands). PBMCs were isolated using density-gradient separation over Ficoll-Pacque as described above. PBMC-derived monocytes were obtained by density-gradient separation over Percoll, followed by one hour of adherence to 96-well flat bottom culture plates (Corning), after which cells were washed once and cultured for 24 hours with either BCG 10 μg/ml (SSI, Denmark), or culture medium (RPMI 1640 supplemented with gentamycin, GlutaMAX and pyruvate) in an end-volume of 200 μl. Either AAT or albumin (both at a concentration of 100 μg/ml) were added to the BCG preparation. After 24 hours of stimulation at 37°C and 5% CO2, cells were washed once with warm PBS and RPMI supplemented with 10% human pool serum was added to an end-volume of 200 μl. At day 6, cells were cultured with LPS (10 ng/ml; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 24 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 after which plates were centrifuged and supernatants were stored at -80°C until cytokines were measured.

## Cytokine Measurements
 Cytokines were determined in PBMC culture supernatants by a multiplex Procartaplex assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and acquired on a Luminex 200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol.

## AAT Concentration Measurement
 Circulating α-1-antitrypsin concentrations were determined in serum using a R&D Duoset ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA).

## Flow Cytometric Analysis and Sorting
 PBMC (1 x 10 7 ) or BM MNC (4 x 10 7 ) were washed in FACS-buffer (0.5% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, PBS), resuspended in blocking-buffer (1 % rat serum (R9759-10ML; Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 1 % mouse serum (M5905-5ML; Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 5 % human serum (H4522-100ML; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in FACS-buffer) and incubated with the respective antibody cocktails for two hours on ice in the dark ( ). After a washing step, secondary staining was performed for PBMCs in FACS-buffer using Streptavidin-PE (1:200) for further 15 min. PBMC and BM MNC were washed, resuspended in FACS-buffer and incubated with the Live/dead marker DRAQ7 (1:1000, BioLegend, USA) for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were acquired using BD FACS ARIAIII (BD Biosciences) and the FACS Diva software (BD Biosciences, USA). Data was analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star, USA) and is presented as percentage of live CD45 + Lin - relative to baseline (D0) for each individual. For dimensionality reduction, 5 x 10 5 CD45 + Lin - cells were sampled for PBMC or 2.5 x 10 5 CD45 + Lin - and 2.5 x 10 5 CD34 + cells for BM MNC and imported into R using the flowCore R package (v1.46.1). Imported PBMC or BM MNC populations were subjected to UMAP ( , ) using the parameter values FSC-A and SSC-A (linear normalization, min=0, max=4.5) and in addition CD34, CD16, HLA-DR, CD33, CD14, CD123, CD45RA, CADM1, CD1c for PBMC or CD10, CD34, CD14, CD38, HLA-DR, CD33, CD90, CD123, CD45RA, CD135, CD16, CD110 for BM MNC. Fluorescent data points were auto-logicle transformed before dimensionality reduction. Cells in the reduced dimensionality space were visualized with the ggplot2 (v3.0.0) package in R. Expression values are indicated in the UMAP space after transformation using the flowJo_biexp_trans function in the flowWorkspace package (v3.28.1) in R. For RNA isolation from HSPCs (HSC+MPP), cells were first sorted into cooled 1.5 ml reaction tubes containing FACS-buffer. Cells were pelleted at 2200 rpm for 7 min at 4°C and vigorously resuspended in 500 μl Qiazol. Tubes were stored at -80°C until further processing.

## Generation and Sequencing of cDNA Libraries for Transcriptome Analysis
 Total RNA was isolated using the miRNeasy Micro Kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. RNA concentration and quality was assed using the Tapestation 2200 system and high sensitivity reagents (Agilent Technologies, USA). Sequencing libraries of FACS-enriched populations were prepared following the QIAseq FX Single Cell RNA Library Kit protocol (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany) and libraries from cultured PBMC were generated according to the Smart-seq2 protocol ( ). For QIAseq FX Single Cell RNA Libraries, concentration of cDNA was assessed by KAPA Library Quantification Kits (Kapa Biosystems, USA) before sequencing single read 75bp on a HiSeq1500 instrument using TruSeq SBS v3-HS chemistry. For Smart-seq2 libraries, concentrations were determined using a Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and average library size was determined using an High Sensitivity D5000 assay on a Tapestation 2200 system (Agilent Technologies, USA) before pooling and sequencing single read 75bp on a NextSeq500 system using High Output v2 chemistry.

## Generation of ATAC-sequencing Data
 Samples for ATAC-sequencing analysis were prepared from CD14 + -MACS-enriched monocytes from fresh PBMCs (Pan Monocyte Isolation Kit, Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). 50,000 cells were washed in cold PBS and resuspended in cold lysis buffer (10 mM NaCL, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 0.1 % IGEPAL, 10mM Tris-HCl pH7.4). After centrifugation, pellets were incubated in primer-loaded transposase Tn5 in reaction buffer (10 mM TAPS-NaOH (pH 8.5) at 25°C, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 10% DMF) for 30 min at 37°C. Samples were subsequently immediately purified using the MinElute kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, eluted in 10 μl H 2 O and stored at -20°C until further processing. Libraries were quantified using KAPA library quantification kits (Kapa Biosystems, USA).

## PBMC Isolation and In Vitro Training Experiments
 After obtaining informed consent, venous blood was drawn into 10 mL EDTA tubes. PBMC isolation was performed by density centrifugation of EDTA blood diluted 1:1 in PBS over Ficoll-Paque (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). Cells were washed twice with PBS and suspended in medium (RPMI 1640) supplemented with gentamicin (10 mg/ml), L-glutamine (10 mM) and pyruvate (10 mM). The cells were counted in a Coulter counter (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, USA). A total of 5 x 10 5 PBMCs per well were incubated at 37°C for 60 minutes in flat bottom 96-well plates. After 60 minutes of adherence, the wells were washed three times with 200 μl warm PBS to wash away non-adherent cells. 200 μl of stimuli in 10% human pooled serum were added (RPMI as a negative control, 10 μg / ml BCG (BCG Denmark, SSI) or 2 μg / ml β-glucan (kindly provided by Prof. David Williams, University of East Tennessee). After 24 hours incubation, stimuli were washed away with 200 μl warm PBS and fresh medium containing 10% human pooled serum was added. Plates were incubated for another 5 days and medium was refreshed once. At day 6, restimulation was performed with RPMI (negative control) or 10 ng / ml LPS. After another 24 hours incubation, supernatants were collected and stored at -20°C until cytokine concentrations were determined.

## DNA Isolation and Genotyping
 DNA was isolated from EDTA venous blood using the Gentra Pure Gene Blood kit, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, Venlo, the Netherlands). DNA samples of 141 individuals were genotyped using the commercially available SNP chip, Illumina HumanOmniExpressExome-8 v1.0. Opticall 0.7.0 with default settings was used for genotype calling. Samples with a call rate ≤ 0.99 were excluded, as were variants with a Hardy-Weinburg equilibrium (HWE) ≤ 0.0001, and minor allele frequency (MAF) ≤ 0.1.

## Olink Cytokine Measurements
 Circulating plasma inflammatory markers were measured before and after BCG vaccination using the commercially available Olink Proteomics AB (Uppsala Sweden) Inflammation Panel (92 inflammatory proteins), using a Proceek Multiplex proximity extension assay ( ). In this assay proteins are recognized by pairs of antibodies coupled to cDNA strands, which bind when they are in close proximity and extend by a polymerase reaction. Detected proteins are normalized and measured on a log 2 -scale as normalized protein expression values (NPX).

## Microbiological Assessment of Mycobacterium bovis Load
 To assess presence of M. bovis BCG DNA in bone marrow cell fractions and bone marrow-derived plasma samples of study subjects, we performed a real-time PCR targeting the IS 6110 insertion sequence, using the primers and probes (set 2) first described by , on the LightCycler480 platform (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).

## Quantification and Statistical Analysis

## RNA-sequencing Pre-processing and Data Analysis
 For pre-processing, data was demultiplexed using bcl2fastq2 (v.2.20). Quality controls were performed by FastQC , reads aligned to human reference transcriptome hg38 from UCSC and transcript abundance quantified using kallisto (v0.440) with default parameters. Further analysis was based on at least 5 million sequenced reads. One sample (derived from donor 9 HSPC, D0) was omitted due to prominent de-clustering of the sample in the PCA based on normalized reads of the top 5000 most variable transcripts. Samples were imported with tximport (v1.8.0) and transcripts were filtered to remove those not corresponding to HGNC gene symbols, read sum lower than 10 across all samples or matching antisense, LINC or pseudogenes. Core analysis of the cleaned RNA-sequencing data set is based on the DESeq2 package (v1.20.0) in R and potential confounding effects are taken into account by incorporating gender and batch of library preparation into the DESeq2 object design matrix. Genes were called differentially expressed if reaching an adjusted p value (padj) < 0.05 after multi-testing correction after Benjamini-Hochberg. Functional annotation of genes and enrichment of ontology terms associated with biological processes was performed within the clusterProfiler (v3.8.1) package. Enrichment analysis of gene sets derived from the Molecular Signatures Database v6.2 using the hallmark gene set collection (“H”) or gene sets based on conserved cis-regulatory motifs (“C3”) was performed with the fGSEA (v1.6) package. Gene sets containing more than 15 and less than 700 genes were included and 10,000 permutations were performed. PCA using the top 3000 most variable genes were visualized with ggplot2 (v3.0). Expression heatmaps are visualized with pheatmap (v1.0.10). The analysis assesses differences between the moment before (D0, n=14) and 3 months after BCG vaccination (D90, n=15) within the vaccinated individuals. The data from the placebo-treated group were used for calibration of the data, to exclude any effects induced in the bone marrow by the first aspiration.

## ATAC-sequencing Data Preprocessing and Analysis
 Sequencing was performed paired end 2 ∗ 50 bases on a HiSeq1500 instrument using TruSeq SBS v3-HS chemistry and data was demultiplexed using bcl2fastq2 v2.20. For pre-processing, reads were aligned to human hg19 index with bowtie1 and duplicates were filtered by applying the Picard tool. Removal of adapter offset and creation of bam files was done with samtools . Open chromatin peaks were called using MACS2, blacklisted regions (ENCFF001TDO_hg19_blacklist.bed.gz) were excluded and peaks were annotated using HOMER (applying annotatePeaks.pl ). Downstream analysis was performed within the DESeq2 (v1.20.0) package environment. PCA was performed including all detected peaks and differentially accessible (DA) peaks were defined as baseMean > 5 and p value < 0.05. For detection of a core set of DA peaks multiple testing correction was included (Benjamini Hochberg) and FC ≥ 2 required. Coverage of open chromatin peaks were visualized with Gviz in R.

## Training Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) Mapping In Vitro Trained Immunity - 200FG Cohort
 The study was performed in a cohort of ∼200 healthy individuals of Western European ancestry from the 200FG Human Functional Genomics Project (77% males and 23% females, age range 23-73 years old). The length of the box in the box plot is interquartile range (Q3–Q1). The whiskers indicate the range of 1.5 × the length of the box from either end of the box. P values were obtained using linear regression analysis of cytokine on genotype data.

## Training QTL Mapping
 Both genotype and data on trained immunity responses was obtained for a total of 141 individuals. Age and gender were included as co-variables in the linear model to correct for the cytokine distributions for QTL mapping. First, raw cytokine levels were log-transformed and ratios of cytokine production in primed (BCG or B-glucan) vs. nonprimed cells (RPMI control) were taken as the change of cytokine levels. The cytokine changes were mapped to genotype data using a linear regression model with age and gender as covariates. SNPs in the vicinity of the genes of interest (±250kb) were investigated.

## Comparison of Neutrophil Count in BCG-Vaccinated vs BCG-Naïve Infants in the Melbourne Infant Study: BCG for Infection & Allergy Reduction
 Participants were a subset of neonates from The Melbourne Infant Study: BCG for Allergy and Infection Reduction (MIS BAIR) (clinical trials registration NCT01906853 ). The trial was approved by the human ethics research committees of the Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne (RCH) (HREC 33025) and Mercy Hospital for Women (HREC R12/28). This randomised controlled trial comprises 1244 healthy participants recruited antenatally between 2013 and 2016 to investigate whether BCG vaccination (0.05mL intradermal) BCG-Denmark, SSI) at birth protects against childhood infection, allergy and asthma. All participants received hepatitis B vaccine at birth according to Australian guidelines. Inclusion criteria in MIS BAIR were: greater than 32 weeks gestation, birth weight greater than 1500 grams, mother not HIV positive, absence of symptoms or signs of illness, and no known contact with TB. From the subset of participants whose parent/guardian provided consent, a blood sample was obtained by venapuncture for a full blood examination (FBE) in the neonatal period. Blood samples were analysed on an Advia 2120i (Siemens Healthineers, Germany). Those participants who had a FBE taken after randomisation were included in the study.

## Statistical Analysis of Data from MIS BAIR Study
 Hemoglobin, mean cell volume, white cell count, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio and platelets were compared between the BCG-vaccinated and BCG-naïve groups using a univariate regression analysis. To identify variables to include in a multivariate regression analysis, the effect of sex, gestational age, birth method, birth weight, age at FBE, and time between randomization and FBE as potential confounders on each FBE parameter was assessed using bivariate regressions. Age at FBE, and time between randomization and FBE were found to be related to all outcomes. As these two variables are highly correlated, only age at FBE was included in the multivariate analysis to adjust for this potential confounder. In the multivariate analysis, only the mean neutrophil count differed between the groups. The adjusted difference in the mean neutrophil count and 9 5% confidence interval (CI) between the BCG-vaccinated and BCG-naïve groups were calculated. This was repeated with the participants stratified into the following groups: 0-12 hours, 12-24 hours, 24-36 hours, 36-48 hours, and greater than 48 hours between randomization and FBE.

## Additional Resources
 The clinical trial registration number for the Melbourne Infant Study: BCG for Allergy and Infection Reduction (MIS BAIR) is NCT01906853 ( ClinicalTrials.gov ).

## Acknowledgments
 This study was supported by an ERC advanced grant (#833247) and a Spinoza grant of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (to M.G.N.). Additionally, this study was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC2151 – 390873048 (to M.G.N., A.S., and J.L.S.), and an Emmy Noether research grant (SCHL2116/1 to A.S.). CVIVA is established with a grant from the Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF108). Additionally, this project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement no 733100 (to J.L.S.).

## Author Contributions
 Conceptualization, M.G.N., A.S., L.C.J.d.B., B.C., and B.A.B.; Formal Analysis and Investigation, B.C., L.C.J.d.B., L.G., M.E.J.B., S.P., K.H., K.K., M.O., and Y.L.; Writing, M.G.N., A.S., B.C., and L.C.J.d.B.; Supervision, M.G.N., A.S., C.S.B., W.J.F.M.v.d.V., R.v.C., J.L.S., L.A.B.J., and N.C.

## Declaration of Interests
 M.G.N. and L.A.B.J. are scientific founders of Trained Therapeutics Discovery. All other authors declare no competing interests.

 Published: June 15, 2020

## Footnotes
 Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.014 .

## Contributor Information
 Mihai G. Netea, Email: mihai.netea@radboudumc.nl.
 Andreas Schlitzer, Email: andreas.schlitzer@uni-bonn.de.

## Supplemental Information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S4 and Tables S1, S4–S7, S9, S11, and S12

## Table S2. RNA-Seq Samples and Alignment Statistics, Related to Figures 3–5

## Table S3. DEGs in HSPCs (D0 versus D90) from BCG-Vaccinated Individuals, Related to Figures 3–5

## Table S8. SNP Variants Surrounding Genomic Regions of TFs Associated with Trained Immunity, Related to Figure 5

## Table S10. Core Set of DA Regions in CD14 + Monocytes from BCG-Vaccinated Individuals (D0 Versus D90), Related to Figure 6

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## References

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S4 and Tables S1, S4–S7, S9, S11, and S12

## Table S2. RNA-Seq Samples and Alignment Statistics, Related to Figures 3–5

## Table S3. DEGs in HSPCs (D0 versus D90) from BCG-Vaccinated Individuals, Related to Figures 3–5

## Table S8. SNP Variants Surrounding Genomic Regions of TFs Associated with Trained Immunity, Related to Figure 5

## Table S10. Core Set of DA Regions in CD14 + Monocytes from BCG-Vaccinated Individuals (D0 Versus D90), Related to Figure 6

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## Data Availability Statement
 RNA sequencing and ATAC data is available under GEO: GSE124220 . Human functional Genomics data is available through https://hfgp.bbmri.nl ( ). Scripts used to analyze these data will be shared upon request.