# status=OA_FULLTEXT pmid=32728699 pmcid=PMC7537386 ident=32728699

J Exp Med J Exp Med 483 jexpmed 2985109R jem The Journal of Experimental Medicine 0022-1007 1540-9538 The Rockefeller University Press PMC7537386 PMC7537386.1 7537386 7537386 32728699 10.1084/jem.20191711 jem.20191711 1 Article 

## A committed tissue-resident memory T cell precursor within the circulating CD8 + effector T cell pool
 The existence of a circulating CD8 + T RM precursor https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0445-7548 Kok Lianne Conceptualization Data curation Formal analysis Investigation Methodology Project administration Software Visualization Writing - original draft Dijkgraaf Feline E. Conceptualization Data curation Investigation Methodology Project administration Resources Supervision Validation Visualization Writing - original draft Writing - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3074-8477 Urbanus Jos Methodology Resources https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7113-0476 Bresser Kaspar Methodology Software Vredevoogd David W. Methodology Cardoso Rebeca F. Investigation Writing - review & editing Perié Leïla Conceptualization Resources Writing - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9215-3087 Beltman Joost B. Methodology Software Writing - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0517-8804 Schumacher Ton N. Conceptualization Funding acquisition Supervision Writing - review & editing ). The latter population, commonly refered to as tissue-resident memory T cells (T RM ), has been shown to be important for local control of reinfection in tissues such as skin, intestine, and lung ( ; ; ; ; ) and can be distinguished from its circulating counterpart by increased expression of markers such as CD103 and CD69 ( , ).
 A number of studies have provided evidence that certain subsets of T EFF possess an enhanced capacity to differentiate into T RM . Specifically, T EFF located in inflamed tissues that express CD69, CD103, or CD127, but lack killer cell lectin-like receptor G1 (KLRG1) expression, are considered to have a superior capacity to give rise to T RM ( ; ; ). Furthermore, those T EFF in peripheral tissues that are prone to differentiate into T RM display a unique transcriptome that differs from the transcriptional profile associated with T CIRCM formation ( ). While these studies have established that the propensity to generate T RM is unequally distributed over the effector pool, prior work has also demonstrated that T RM and T CIRCM share a common clonal origin ( ). Thus, differences in T RM -forming capacity do not appear imprinted in naive CD8 + T cells, but a diversification in T RM generation potential is evident in the T EFF pool. A recent study has suggested that naive T cells can be poised for a T RM fate in steady-state conditions, through TGFβ signaling induced by migratory dendritic cells ( ). However, it has not been elucidated whether such poising-signals result in variations in T RM generating potential between individual naive clones. Furthermore, at present, it has not been established at which point during an antigen-specific T cell response the progeny of naive T cells commits to the T RM lineage.
 To address these issues, we tracked the offspring of individual naive CD8 + T cells responding to local skin vaccination by means of genetic barcoding. Using this lineage-tracing tool, we provide evidence that, whereas independent T cell clones possess an equal capacity to enter inflamed tissue during the effector phase, a subset of T cell clones possesses a heightened capacity to subsequently form tissue-resident T cell memory. Moreover, by combining lineage tracing with single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), we report the existence of a circulatory T EFF subset that bears a strong transcriptional resemblance to T RM . Importantly, individual T cell clones contribute differentially to this population, and production of this T RM -poised T EFF subset by individual T cell clones is associated with their capacity to form T RM . Further support for the existence of a circulating T RM precursor comes from the observation that T RM -forming propensity is clonally acquired before tissue entry and is fixed upon secondary antigen encounter. Jointly, these experiments provide definitive evidence for the existence of a circulating T RM precursor population that commits to the T RM -fate before tissue entrance.

## Results

## Individual T cell clones contribute proportionally to the systemic and skin T EFF response
 To evaluate how individual naive T cells contribute to the T RM lineage, and how the T RM population is developmentally related to the systemic CD8 + T cell subsets, we set out to track the progeny of individual naive CD8 + T cells within the T EFF , T CIRCM , and T RM compartment in vivo by genetic barcoding. To this purpose, we first generated a high-diversity retroviral barcode library (BC2.0) that comprises ∼200,000 unique cellular identifiers, thereby enabling the tracking of many individual cells in parallel. Using this BC2.0 genetic labeling system, we subsequently generated naive CD8 + T cells that each carry a unique DNA barcode ( , ). Specifically, thymocytes were transduced with the BC2.0 library and injected intrathymically into recipient mice to allow maturation into barcode-labeled naive T cells. This experimental approach allows for the genetic labeling of naturally cycling T cell precursors, thereby avoiding a requirement for in vitro activation of naive T cells. As shown previously, barcode-labeled T cells that are generated in this manner behave identically to unmanipulated naive OT-I T cells, in terms of both T cell response kinetics and effector differentiation potential ( ). To be able to examine T cell fate and T cell development into the T RM lineage without TCR affinity as a confounder ( ), thymocytes were obtained from OT-I TCR transgenic mice, in which all CD8 + T cells carry the OT-I TCR specific for the OVA 257–264 -H2-K b complex ( ).
 After in vivo development of barcode-labeled thymocytes into mature naive GFP + OT-I T cell clones, cells were harvested, and physiologically relevant numbers (i.e., 500–1,000; ) of cells were transferred into wild-type recipient mice. Subsequently, a local immune response was induced by vaccination of hind leg skin of recipient mice with plasmid DNA encoding the OVA 257–264 epitope ( ; ; ; ). Local vaccination induced clonal expansion and subsequent contraction of the barcode-labeled OT-I T cell pool ( ). At late time points (>60 d) after vaccination, GFP + OT-I T cells remained detectable at low frequencies in both the circulation ( , left) and at the site of skin vaccination. Consistent with prior work, the large majority of the barcode-labeled T RM harvested from the tissue site expressed the canonical tissue-residency markers CD69 and CD103 ( , middle and right).
 Having validated that skin vaccination induces clonal expansion of naive barcode-labeled T cells and their differentiation into T EFF , T CIRCM , and T RM , we aimed to assess whether individual naive T cells differ in their capacity to yield T EFF at distinct body sites. To this end, vaccinated recipient mice were sacrificed at the peak of the T EFF expansion phase (day 12); blood, spleen, draining lymph nodes, and affected skin tissue were collected; and clonal output was quantified by DNA barcode sequencing ( , top). Barcode analysis of GFP + OT-I T cells present in the blood compartment at the peak of the response showed that, similar to prior lineage-tracing studies involving Listeria monocytogenes –OVA 257–264 infection ( ; ), the capacity of individual naive T cells to expand in response to DNA vaccination was highly variable, with ∼7% of the clones producing ∼50% of the total T EFF pool. Comparison of clonal output in the sampled tissue sites showed that at the peak of the T cell response, the vast majority of clones contributed to the T EFF pool at all four examined locations ( ; controls in ). Furthermore, the relative sizes of individual T cell clones at these different sites were highly correlated (r > 0.8), indicating that the progeny of different naive T cells possess a similar capacity to disseminate throughout the body during the T EFF phase ( ). As a control, the high clonal overlap between T cell compartments in skin and at other body sites was shown not to be explained by a potential contamination of skin samples with blood-borne T cells ( ). Thus, the ability to enter inflamed peripheral tissues is equally distributed over the progeny of responding naive T cell clones.

## Clonal bias in T RM generation
 Having established that individual T cell clones display a similar capacity to disseminate to the skin and lymphoid compartments during the effector phase, we next evaluated whether this equal distribution of clones persisted into memory. To quantify the output of individual clones in the two memory compartments, recipient mice received a local skin vaccination, T EFF blood samples were drawn on day 12, and the skin T RM and T CIRCM populations from the same mice were isolated after memory formation (day >60; ). In line with prior work ( ), comparison of clone sizes in the two memory pools revealed that the vast majority of naive T cells contributed to both the T CIRCM and T RM cell lineages (84.8%). Strikingly, however, the contribution of individual T cell clones to the T CIRCM or T RM pool was highly disparate (r = 0.32; , quality controls in ). Importantly, this low degree of similarity was not due to suboptimal sampling, as shown by the high correlation (r > 0.9; ) of technical replicates of either the skin T RM or the T CIRCM pool. Thus, although during the effector phase individual T cell clones contribute essentially equally to the T cell pool at different body sites, many clones preferentially contribute to either the T CIRCM or the T RM pool after contraction. This disparity in memory clone distribution is also present upon natural infection, as shown by DNA barcode analysis of the T CIRCM and T RM compartments after localized HSV-OVA 257–264 infection (r = 0.25; ). Specifically, after HSV-OVA 257–264 infection, the average T cell clone preferentially contributed to either the T RM or the T CIRCM compartment by a factor of 11.34-fold (mean ratio of contributions to the two memory compartments, taking the lowest contribution as denominator and excluding nonshared clones). As a control, the average ratio between technical replicates was 2.19 (r = 0.86). By the same token, in response to DNA vaccination, T cell clones showed a preferential contribution toward either the circulating or skin-resident memory T cell compartment by a factor of 11.98 (factor of 1.66 between technical replicates).
 Next, we examined whether the bias in T RM and T CIRCM generation in response to DNA vaccination could be explained by differences in clonal T EFF expansion. First, to exclude clones that could show clonal bias because of random sampling variation, clones that were exclusively observed in one of the two memory T cell compartments and that represented <0.25% of that pool were removed (retaining 58.5% of barcodes and 97.2% of reads; before filtering, ; after filtering, ; filtering strategy, ). Subsequently, to be able to identify biased clones, we defined a “bias threshold” based on comparison of technical replicates, a setting in which clonal bias can by definition not occur ( ). Application of the resulting threshold (fold difference of >4.8) to the lineage-tracing data revealed that close to 50% of T cell clones preferentially contributed to either memory T cell compartment, with 29.7% of clones being biased toward T RM formation and 16.9% toward T CIRCM formation ( ). Notably, analysis of effector phase burst sizes of T RM -biased, T CIRCM -biased, and nonbiased T cell clones showed that biased memory cell generation was also observed for T EFF -stage clones that had undergone massive or little expansion ( ). These results demonstrate that, independently of clonal burst size, a large fraction of T cell clones preferentially produces T RM or T CIRCM , indicating that T RM and T CIRCM are separated not only by location and phenotype but also by descent.

## Nonstochastic formation of tissue-resident and systemic T cell memory
 Next, we wanted to understand whether the clonal bias observed in memory ( ) was due to remodeling of either the circulatory or the skin-resident compartment during T cell contraction. As clonal hierarchy is highly similar at different body sites during the effector phase ( ), we reasoned that the T EFF pool in blood could be used as a “historical snapshot” of clonal distribution in all immune compartments before memory formation. Comparison of clone sizes of day-12 effector blood to the skin and spleen compartment in effector and memory phase demonstrated that both compartments in memory phase were substantially more disparate from T EFF blood than during effector phase ( ; and ). Thus, during memory formation, both the skin-resident and the circulating T cell compartment undergo a substantial change in clonal hierarchy ( ; and ), resulting in differential contributions of individual T cell clones to the two memory compartments ( ).
 The observed divergence in clonal composition of T cell populations at the two sites could arise either through an intrinsic difference in cell fitness to survive in particular microenvironments or through the stochastic engraftment of cells at the individual sites. To test the latter hypothesis, we simulated the generation of T RM and T CIRCM pools that were derived from a founder population with a size that equaled either the experimentally observed T memory pool (indicated as α; ), 10% of the observed T memory pool, or the smallest possible founder pool (i.e., the number of individual clones observed in the memory pool, indicated as β; ). Subsequently, the correlation in clone sizes between the simulated T memory pools and the experimentally observed T EFF pool (indicated as Y; ) were calculated and compared with the correlation between the experimentally observed T memory and T EFF pool (indicated as X; ). Note that only when Y approaches X, stochastic engraftment of T cells can explain the observed clonal bias in memory phase. Interestingly, this analysis demonstrated that stochastic engraftment of a founder population with the size of the observed T memory pool (α) or one tenth of this size could not explain the observed skewing during T memory formation in any of the mice ( ). Furthermore, stochastic engraftment by the smallest possible founder pool was also insufficient to explain the skewing in the observed T cell memory pool in the majority of mice ( ). Collectively, these data indicate that the skewed composition of both the T RM and the T CIRCM pool is unlikely to be explained by stochastic survival or engraftment, thereby suggesting the existence of intrinsic differences between T cell clones in their capacity to form systemic and tissue-resident T cell memory.

## The circulating T EFF pool harbors cells with a T RM -like transcriptional signature
 The pool of circulating T EFF is phenotypically and transcriptionally diverse and, next to the commonly recognized subsets of terminal effector (TE) cells and memory precursor (MP) cells, additional heterogeneity has been reported ( ; ). To understand whether such heterogeneity could explain preferential T RM formation by individual T cell clones, we performed scRNA-seq on blood-derived barcode-labeled T EFF (day 12) and subsequently determined clonal output in the T RM and T CIRCM populations of the same mice at day >60. Importantly, as barcode sequences are contained within the 3′ untranslated region of GFP transcripts, scRNA-seq allowed for the parallel analysis of transcriptional state and clonal origin of individual vaccine-specific T EFF (see experimental setup in ).
 To delineate the transcriptional heterogeneity within the pool of sequenced T EFF , the MetaCell (MC) algorithm ( ) was applied, resulting in the grouping of 5,383 T cells into 14 reproducibly detected MCs ( and ). Expression analysis of Ilr7a and Klrg1 (genes commonly used to identify the MP and TE populations, respectively) demonstrated substantial variation in expression over the MCs, underlining the variability in cell states within the T EFF pool. Next, to distinguish MCs that correspond to TE and MP T EFF cell states, expression of a multitude of genes associated with MP ( Sell , Cd28 , Il7r , Cd27 , and Cxcr3 ) and TE ( Klf2 , Tbx21 , Cx3cr1 , Klrg1 , and Zeb2 ; ) were analyzed at the MC level. Hierarchal clustering of MCs based on this gene set segregated the 14 MCs into three distinct classes: MP (7 MCs), TE (4 MCs), and intermediate (Int; 3 MCs) T cells ( , left). To subsequently reveal possible heterogeneity within the seven MP MCs in expression of gene sets associated with T RM formation, we selected genes that have previously been described as differentially expressed between mature skin T RM and T CIRCM ( ; ; ). Strikingly, clustering of the MP MCs based on core T RM and T CIRCM genes separated the MP population into two main clusters; one (three MCs) that displayed prominent expression of T CIRCM -related genes, such as the lymphoid homing markers Sell (CD62L) and Cxcr5, and also the transcription factors Klf3 and Eomes ; and a second cluster (four MCs) that was strongly enriched for core T RM signature genes, such as Itgae (CD103), Itga1 (CD49a), and Fabp5 ( , right; and ). Based on this enrichment and depletion of T RM - and T CIRCM -associated genes, we classified these two MP clusters as T RM -like and T CIRCM -like MPs. In summary, based on gene expression profiles, we divided the high-complexity T EFF pool into four distinct transcriptional states: TE, Int, T CIRCM -like MP, and T RM -like MP ( ).
 To determine the resemblance of the T RM -like MP population observed in blood to bona fide skin T RM in more detail, we also evaluated expression of additional genes involved in T RM biology that are not included in the previously used gene set. Notably, genes encoding the surface molecule CD101 ( Cd101 ; ) and the nuclear aryl hydrocarbon receptor AhR ( Ahr; ), both considered signature skin T RM genes, were pronouncedly expressed in T RM -like MP cells ( ). In addition, a strong relation between the expression of these genes and Itgae (Cd101: r = 0.86, P < 0.0005; Ahr: r = 0.87, P < 0.0005) was observed across all 14 MCs ( ). Furthermore, T RM -like MP cells showed marked expression of the skin-migratory genes Ccr10 and Cxcr6 ( ; ) and displayed moderate to high expression of the IL-15 ( Il2rb) and TGFβ ( Tgfbr1) receptors, of which the ligands have been described to be essential for skin T RM differentiation and maintenance ( ; ). Collectively, these data demonstrate the existence of a group of cells that transcriptionally mimic T RM, within the pool of circulating vaccine-specific T EFF .

## T cell clones differ in their contribution to the T EFF states
 Next, we set out to test whether individual T cell clones differed in their contribution to the four T EFF states. To this end, mRNA-derived barcode sequences were mapped to their associated transcriptome by matching the cell code sequences that mark all transcripts derived from an individual cell. For 28% of the T EFF from which we had retrieved gene expression data (1,527 of the 5,383 cells), we could reliably determine barcode sequences, and thus, infer clonal origin. These 1,527 cells were distributed over 151 clones, ranging from 1 to 189 sampled cells per clone, with a mean and median count of 10 and 4 cells, respectively ( ). Analysis of the distribution of clonally related cells over the four effector subsets revealed that clones differed significantly in their T EFF output toward the different T cell states, as indicated by the deviation from the expected distribution in case of stochastic T EFF differentiation (χ square test, P < 0.0005). For example, while some clones almost exclusively produced TE (i.e., ∼12% of T EFF -stage clones consisted of >80% TE, versus a median of 37.5%), other clones were strongly skewed toward the production of T RM -like MP (i.e., ∼5.5% of T EFF -stage clones consisted of >70% of T RM -like MP, versus a median of 26.1%; ). To evaluate whether the adoption of transcriptional biases in the T EFF pool could be driven by variations in clonal expansion, we assessed the relation between T EFF clone size, determined by bulk DNA barcode sequencing, and the relative contribution of each clone to the different T EFF subsets. No direct association between T EFF clone size and T EFF cell state was detectable in response to skin vaccination, as T EFF subset bias was observed for small and large clones ( ). Thus, clones responding to local skin vaccination differentially generate the subpopulations that jointly make up the T EFF pool, and this bias cannot be explained by level of clonal expansion.

## T RM -like transcriptional signature in effector phase predicts T RM -forming potential at the clonal level
 The above data reveal the existence of a subgroup of circulating T RM -like cells in the effector phase and demonstrate that individual clones vary in their contribution to this subgroup of effector-phase T cells. To determine whether the observed T RM -like cells could be considered circulating T RM precursors, we analyzed the relationship between skin T RM clone size 75 d after vaccination and transcriptional state of the matched clone in the circulating effector phase compartment 12 d after vaccination. Notably, relative output of individual T cell clones to the T RM -like MP pool in the effector phase showed a significant correlation with T RM clone size in skin during memory, whereas such a correlation was not observed for the three other T EFF states ( ). To further understand the relationship between contribution to the skin T RM pool and T EFF states, we selected clones either randomly ( n = 15, 10,000×) or with a proportional bias toward clones that dominated the skin T RM pool (i.e., in case clone A generated 2× more T RM than clone B; clone A was 2× more likely to be selected than clone B), or with a proportional bias toward small T RM clones (i.e., in case clone A generated 2× more T RM than clone B; clone A was 2× less likely to be selected than clone B). Analysis of mean T EFF state output by large ( , red histogram) and by small ( , blue histogram) T RM clones demonstrated that the propensity of clones to form T RM is predicted by the production of T RM -like MP by such clones in the effector phase. In contrast, production of T CIRCM -like MP during the effector phase was not predictive of T RM formation capacity. As a control, a similar analysis of the T CIRCM pool revealed that T CIRCM formation was predicted by the production of T CIRCM -like MP, but not T RM -like MP ( , bottom), and this observation was corroborated by correlation analysis ( ). In line with expectations, a skewing of clonal output toward the TE state during the effector phase was associated with a diminished capacity to yield both T RM and T CIRCM ( ) . Additional analysis of the relationship between T RM formation and the absolute quantities of circulating T RM -like and T CIRCM -like MPs produced by individual clones during the effector phase furthermore suggested that total T RM -like MP production better predicts mature T RM formation at the clonal level (R 2 = 0.37, P < 0.0005; and r = 0.59, P < 0.0005), than the quantities of T CIRCM -like MP (R 2 = 0.20, P = 0.012; and r = 0.47, P = 0.01; ). Jointly, these data demonstrate that T cell clones that preferentially yield circulating T RM -like MP cells in the effector phase are endowed with a superior T RM forming capacity.
 To test whether skewing toward T RM -like MP during the effector phase could explain not only T RM clone size in memory but also the preferential production of T RM over T CIRCM , as described in , clones with various degrees of memory bias (i.e., ratio clone size in T RM pool/clone size in T CIRCM pool) were selected in silico ( , bottom), and relative production of T RM -like and T CIRCM -like MP by these clones during the effector phase was analyzed. Notably, production of T RM -like MP cells during the effector phase was positively associated with the subsequent preferential production of T RM over T CIRCM ( ). Moreover, gene-expression analysis of the 10 most T RM -biased and 10 most T CIRCM -biased clones demonstrated that T EFF -stage clones that preferentially produce T RM express elevated levels of core T RM genes, while being depleted of core T CIRCM genes ( ). In conclusion, the nonstochastic capacity of clones to preferentially form T RM is preceded by the acquisition of a T RM -fate poised transcriptional profile by these clones in the circulating T EFF compartment.

## T RM differentiation is a clone-imprinted attribute that is preserved upon secondary antigen encounter
 Based on the observed relationship between the capacity of clones to form T RM and the transcriptional profile of these clones during the effector phase, we hypothesized that the circulating T EFF pool harbors cells that are already committed to the T RM fate. If T RM fate decisions are indeed made before entry of the inflamed tissue site, a pool of responding T cell clones would be expected to reproducibly show the same T RM -forming capacity at different immunized skin sites. To test this, we generated two anatomically separated pools of skin T RM , by parallel vaccination of the right and left hind leg skin of mice ( ). If the development of T RM would be determined solely by stochastic encounter of inflamed skin-derived microenvironmental signals, clone size distributions in the two anatomically separate skin sites would be expected to be disparate. Conversely, if T RM fate commitment were to be imprinted in circulating T EFF -stage clones, the two skin sites would be expected to show a similar clonal distribution. Comparison of the clonal composition of either the left or the right leg skin T RM compartment with that of the T CIRCM compartment at day >60 after vaccination recapitulated the prior observation that a large fraction of naive T cells yield progeny that either preferentially form T RM or T CIRCM (T RM-LEFT − T CIRCM : r = 0.37, P < 0.0005; T RM-RIGHT − T CIRCM : r = 0.30, P < 0.0005), with the average T cell clone differing >10-fold in contribution to the skin and the systemic memory compartment (average ratio T RM-LEFT − T CIRCM : 10.14, average ratio T RM-RIGHT − T CIRCM : 11.67, ). Strikingly, comparison of the T RM populations at the two spatially separated skin sites revealed a substantially higher degree of similarity (r = 0.78, P < 0.0005), with an average clone size ratio of 3.17 ( ). To compare the magnitude of this clone-intrinsic bias in T RM formation relative to a bias of individual T cell clones to yield either systemic central memory (T CM ) or effector memory (T EM ) T cells, we subsequently performed barcode lineage tracing of T RM from the two anatomically separate skin compartments, of T CM (defined as CD62L + ) from LN and spleen, and of T EM (defined as CD62L – ) from spleen. Complete-linkage clustering analysis again showed the highly similar clonal composition of the memory T cells at the two spatially separated skin compartments ( ). In addition, this analysis revealed that these two T RM compartments differ more strongly in clonal composition from all the three systemic memory T cell compartments than, for instance, splenic T EM and LN T CM differ from each other ( ). Thus, relative to differences in capacity to produce central memory or effector memory T cells, clonal imprinting of the capacity to yield tissue-resident T cell memory versus systemic T cell memory is profound.
 Finally, to test whether the acquisition of T RM generation potential is a stable property of CD8 + T cells, recipients of barcode-labeled naive OT-I T cells were subjected to a primary vaccination on the right hind leg, followed by a secondary vaccination on the left hind leg >60 d later ( , top). In line with prior work ( ; ), low frequencies (on average fourfold less than at the vaccinated site) of T RM were detected at the initially unperturbed tissue site upon primary vaccination ( ). Following secondary vaccination at this site, local memory T cell numbers increased to exceed those seen at the primary vaccination site, indicative of de novo T RM formation induced by the secondary vaccine ( ). Subsequently, barcode abundance was separately assessed at the primary and secondary vaccination site >60 d after secondary vaccination, and was compared with clone abundance in the T CIRCM pool at the same time point. This analysis revealed that the secondary T RM pool was dissimilar to the T CIRCM compartment in terms of clonal hierarchy (average r = 0.5), but greatly resembled the T RM pool generated at the primary site of vaccination (average r = 0.73; ). Furthermore, disparity analysis ( ; explained in ) revealed that the clonal composition of these two T RM pools that were separated in time was equally similar as when two distinct T RM pools were generated simultaneously, indicating that the capacity of individual T cell clones to yield T RM is stable over time. Thus, these data reveal that, before skin entry, the ability of T EFF to form T RM is differentially and permanently imprinted at a clonal level.

## Discussion
 The current data demonstrate that, while all naive T cells yield progeny that disseminate equally well to inflamed skin and the systemic lymphoid compartments, a subset of T cell clones yields offspring with a heightened capacity to persist long-term in peripheral tissues. The observation that tissue entry is equal between progeny derived from distinct clones implies that the selection of the T RM privileged clones is not driven by an enhanced capacity of a subset of circulating effector-stage clones to migrate into the inflamed tissue. Rather, the propensity of clones to generate T RM was linked to the transcriptional state of their circulating T EFF offspring, and in particular the production of MP cells that transcriptionally resemble skin T RM was associated with superior T RM formation. The observed link between transcriptional state during the effector phase and contribution to the T RM compartment following memory formation provides compelling evidence that the identified T EFF subgroup can be considered circulating T RM precursors. Furthermore, the notion of a committed T RM precursor pool in the circulation is also supported by the observation that the clonal composition of T RM pools that form at anatomically separate sites is highly similar, indicating that the propensity to efficiently produce T RM is imprinted into T cells in the circulatory compartment, before tissue entry. Previous reports have suggested that T EFF cells that develop into T RM enter the peripheral tissue early after immunization ( ; ). As the current data demonstrate that T EFF commit to T RM fate before tissue entry, fate decisions of circulating T RM precursors should then also occur early after immunization. In line with this, we observe that the capacity to generate T RM is unequally distributed over T cell clones, which implies that this property must be instilled before substantial clonal expansion. Collectively, our observations argue in favor of early stage T RM fate commitment by a subset of circulating T EFF . Although T RM fate decisions are, at least partially, made in the circulatory compartment, earlier work has established that skin microenvironmental cues, such as TGFβ, IL-15, and cognate antigen ( ; ), are essential in driving T RM formation. Jointly, these observations argue in favor of a model in which a subset of circulating T EFF transcriptionally diverge and subsequently develop a heightened capacity to respond to local cues, thereby selectively promoting the differentiation of their progeny into long-term persisting T RM ( ).
 Through the combination of lineage-tracing and single-cell transcriptome analysis, we uncovered a transcriptional dichotomy within the pool of circulating MP T EFF cells that precedes the divergence in T RM and T CIRCM formation at a clonal level; however, the mechanisms that drive this dichotomy remain to be elucidated. Several studies have shown a link between TCR affinity and T RM generation potential ( ; ; ; ) and it would be of interest to determine whether variation in TCR affinity may influence the capacity of individual T cell clones to yield circulating T RM precursor cells. However, the current data indicate that differential production of circulating T RM -like MP and T RM generation potential can occur independently of variation in TCR affinity, suggesting that other T cell internal and/or external factors are involved. Indeed, an extensive body of work has demonstrated that external signals, such as cytokines and ligands of costimulatory receptors at the T cell priming site, can influence the production of functional memory T cells ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). In addition, cross-priming by Batf3 + cDC1s ( ) and inhibition of mTOR activity ( ; ) have opposing roles in promoting T RM over T CIRCM fate commitment. Conceivably, differential exposure of individual T cell clones to these cues during the priming process forms the mechanistic basis for the observed formation of circulating T RM precursors. Furthermore, steady-state heterogeneity in naive T cell-intrinsic properties, such as developmental origin ( ), prior TGFβ exposure ( ), and stochastic variation in gene expression ( ; ), could differentially precondition naive T cells for T RM fate. Evaluation of the role of these T cell external and internal factors should be of value to delineate the mechanistic processes that leads to the generation of the circulating T RM precursor population that we here identify.

## Materials and methods

## Mice
 C57BL/6J-Ly5.1, C57BL/6J, OT-I, mTmG, and UCB-GFP mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory, and strains were maintained in the animal department of the Netherlands Cancer Institute. The mTmG and UCB-GFP mice were crossed with OT-I mice to obtain mTmG-OT-I and GFP-OT-I strains, respectively. All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of the Netherlands Cancer Institute, in accordance with national guidelines.

## Generation of the BC2.0 high-diversity retroviral barcode library
 The BC1DS_lib oligonucleotide ( ) containing a 21-nt random barcode sequence was PCR amplified (10 cycles: 10 s at 98°C, 30 s at 55°C, and 1 min at 72°C) with Phusion polymerase (New England Biolabs). The resulting PCR-amplified product was column purified (MinElute PCR cleanup kit; Qiagen) and digested with XhoI and EcoRI, followed by ligation into the 3′ untranslated region of the GFP cDNA sequence within the pMX retroviral vector, using the Electroligase kit (New England Biolabs). Electrocompetent DH10b bacteria (Invitrogen) were then electroporated with 16-ng ligation product, and a small fraction of the transformed bacteria were plated on Luria-Bertani agar plates to determine transformation efficiency; the remaining bacteria were grown overnight in 400 ml Luria-Bertani medium (VWR Life Science) supplemented with ampicillin (Sigma-Aldrich). DNA was extracted from the bacterial culture using the Maxiprep kit (Invitrogen).

## Establishment of the barcode reference list
 To be able to match barcode sequences observed in biological samples to a reference list of barcodes present in the BC2.0 library, barcode sequences in the library were PCR amplified in duplicate (repA and repB) and sequenced as independent samples. In brief, barcodes were amplified from 10 ng of retroviral library DNA using a combination of native Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen) and Deep Vent polymerase (New England Biolabs) at a 2:1 ratio, in three consecutive rounds of PCR. First-round PCR was performed using the Top_lib and Bot_lib primers (15 cycles: 5 s at 94°C, 5 s at 57.2°C, and 10 s at 72°C); second-round PCR was performed using the BC1v2DS_For and BC1v2DS_Rev primers (15 cycles: 5 s at 95°C, 5 s at 58°C, and 10 s at 72°C); third-round PCR was performed using the P5_For and P7_Index_Rev primers (7 cycles: 5 s at 94°C, 10 s at 58°C, and 10 s at 72°C). Resulting PCR products were sequenced on an Illumina hiSeq2500 lane. For primer sequences, see .
 In the sequencing data of repA and repB, 349,439 and 333,422 unique barcode sequences were detected, respectively, with 64.32% of all detected sequences being shared between the two replicates. Many of these sequences are likely to be spurious, resulting from PCR and sequencing errors. Such spurious sequences derive from true “mother barcodes” that have a much higher abundance than the “child” sequences, with child sequences differing by up to several nucleotides from the mother sequence and having a reproducible frequency of occurrence of up to ∼5% of the abundance of the mother barcode ( ). To remove those spurious barcode variants, we removed all sequences that had a Levenshtein distance of ≤4 nucleotides ( ) from a potential mother barcode and that also had read count of ≤5% of that potential mother barcode. Additional spurious barcodes that occur at a very low abundance are likely to escape this cleaning procedure, for instance because they contain >4 nucleotide differences from their mother. For this reason, only barcodes that were detected ≥3 times in the two replicates combined were retained in the barcode reference list. After this filtering, a list of 263,582 unique barcodes was obtained, of which only 1.27% was not shared between technical replicates.

## Generation of barcode-labeled T cells
 Retrovirus of the barcode library was produced by transfection of Phoenix-E packaging cells using FuGene6 (Roche). Retroviral supernatant was harvested 48 h after transfection and stored at −80°C. To generate naive barcode-labeled OT-I T cells, thymocytes were harvested from 5–7-wk-old OT-I mice and transduced with the barcode library virus by spinfection (90 min, 400 g ) in IMDM (Gibco Life Technologies) supplemented with 8% FCS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 10 ng/ml recombinant murine IL-7 (PeproTech). To limit the fraction of T cells with multiple barcode integrations, barcode library virus was diluted before transduction to obtain a transduction efficiency of 8–10%. After 24 h of culture, cells were harvested, and viable thymocytes were enriched using Lympholite-M Cell Separation Medium (Cedarlane) followed by purification of GFP + cells by FACS (FACSAria II [BD Biosciences] and MoFLo Astrios [Beckman Coulter]). Subsequently, ∼1 million sorted GFP + thymocytes were intrathymically injected into 5–7-wk-old C57BL/6 or C57BL/6-Ly5.1 primary recipient mice, as described previously ( ; ). After a maturation period of 2–4 wk, whole blood, spleen, and LNs (cervical, axillary, brachial, mesenteric, inguinal, and lumbar) were harvested and pooled, followed by enrichment of CD8 + T cells using the Mouse CD8 T Lymphocyte Enrichment Set (BD Biosciences). The fraction of GFP + cells in the CD8 + T cell pool was determined by flow cytometry (Fortessa; BD Biosciences), and 500–1,000 GFP + cells were adoptively transferred into 8–14-wk-old secondary C57BL/6 or C57BL/6-Ly5.1 recipient mice.

## Immunization by DNA vaccination and HSV1 infection
 1 d before vaccination with the HELP-OVA vector that encodes the OVA 257–264 epitope (SIINFEKL), the shuffled HPV E7 sequence, and MHC-II class restricted helper epitopes ( ; ), fur was removed from hind legs with Veet depilation cream (Reckitt Benckiser). Primary DNA vaccination was performed on days 0, 3, and 6 by tattooing ( ) a 15-μl droplet of 2 μg/μl DNA solution in 10 mmol/l Tris, pH 8.0, and 1 mmol/l EDTA, pH 8.0, per leg, by means of a sterile disposable 9-needle bar mounted on a rotary tattoo device oscillating at a frequency of 100 Hz for 1 min with a needle depth of 1 mm (MT.DERM). For secondary vaccinations, mice received a single DNA tattoo with 20 μl of the 2 μg/μl plasmid solution on the inside and outside of the leg, >60 d after start of primary vaccination.
 The HSV TOM-OVA virus, containing a CMV immediate-early promoter tomato-OVA 257–264 gene cassette in the intergenic region between the UL26 and UL27 genes of the HSV-1 strain KOS ( ), was grown in Vero cells, as described previously ( ). 1 d before infection, fur was removed from hind legs with Veet depilation cream (Reckitt Benckiser). On day 0, a 7-μl droplet containing ∼3.125 × 10 5 PFU HSV TOM-OVA in DMEM (Gibco Life Technologies) per area was given once to both legs of anesthetized mice by means of a tattoo, using a sterile disposable nine-needle bar mounted on a rotary tattoo device oscillating at a frequency of 100 Hz for 1 min with a needle depth of 0.5 mm (MT.DERM). The first macroscopic skin lesions became visible on treated areas on approximately day 3 after infection (not depicted).

## Recovery of barcode-labeled T cells from vaccinated and HSV-infected recipient mice
 To sample the T EFF pool without sacrificing the animal, a 300-μl blood sample was drawn from the tail vein. Erythrocytes were lysed using NH 4 Cl, and samples were stored as cell pellets at −80°C. To recover GFP + T cells from skin and secondary lymphoid organs, in either the effector or memory phase, mice were sacrificed, whole blood was collected by heart puncture, and spleen and LNs (cervical, axillary, brachial, mesenteric, inguinal, and lumbar) were harvested. Blood, spleen, and LN samples derived from one mouse were processed as one sample, unless indicated otherwise. In addition, skin tissue from the hind legs was collected and processed separately. For isolation of barcode-labeled cells from skin tissue, Veet-depilated (Reckitt Benckiser) full-thickness skin was collected using scissors and forceps and minced into small pieces. Subsequently, skin fragments were taken up in DMEM (Gibco Life Technologies) supplemented with collagenase IV (Gibco) and II (Worthington Biochemical Corp.; both 1.25 mg/ml final), DNase type I (0.25 mg/ml final; Sigma-Aldrich), 4% FCS (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.25% BSA fraction IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and HBSS (Gibco Life Technologies) and rotated at 37°C overnight. After digestion, skin preparations were diluted with DMEM containing 8% FCS, filtered over 100- and 70-μm strainers (Falcon), washed twice, and taken up in HBSS supplemented with 0.5% BSA, pulmozyme (40 μg/ml final; Roche), and the indicated antibodies ( ). After staining for 30 min at 4°C, samples were washed and filtered through a 30-μm strainer (Miltenyi Biotec). To exclude dead cells, samples were stained with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich). Barcode-labeled CD69 + CD103 + skin-resident CD8 + memory T cells were sorted on a FACSAria II (BD Biosciences) or FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences). Typical yields were 1,000–10,000 GFP + CD8 + cells per leg.
 Harvested spleen and LN tissue of individual mice was mashed through a 70-μm strainer into single-cell suspensions and pooled with matched blood samples. This pooled cell pool, referred to as the circulatory compartment, was treated with NH 4 Cl to remove erythrocytes and stained with the indicated antibodies ( ). GFP + CD8 + cells were then isolated by cell sorting on a MoFLo Astrios (Beckman Coulter), with typical yields of 1,000–10,000 GFP + CD8 + cells per mouse. After isolation, sorted cells derived from either the skin or circulatory compartment were lysed in DirectPCR Lysis Reagent (Viagen Biotech) supplemented with 0.4 mg/ml Proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich), and resulting samples were stored at −20°C.

## Analysis of the presence of blood-borne T cells in the skin T EFF pool
 To determine the fraction of blood-borne T cells in skin preparations of the vaccination site obtained during the effector phase, splenocytes of GFP-OT-I transgenic mice were first negatively enriched with the Mouse CD8 T Lymphocyte Enrichment Set (BD Biosciences). Subsequently, C57BL/6J-Ly5.1 animals received ∼700 naive GFP-OT-I splenocytes i.v., followed by primary DNA vaccination on Veet-depilated hind legs as described above. On day 10 after vaccination, mice received a one-time injection of 1.5 × 10 6 CD8 + negatively enriched mTmG-OT-I splenocytes as a reference for blood-borne T cells, 5 min before sacrificing the animals. Subsequently, blood and skin tissue was harvested, and cells were isolated from the two compartments, as described above. Single-cell suspensions were then stained with IR-dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on an LSR II SORP (BD Biosciences).

## Barcode DNA amplification and next-generation sequencing
 Genomic DNA was isolated from frozen pellets of effector blood samples using DNeasy Blood and Tissue (Qiagen) for downstream PCR. Sorted samples of lymphoid tissues and from skin were lysed in DirectPCR Lysis Reagent (Viagen Biotech). Products of samples in experiments in which all samples contained more than ∼3,000 barcode-labeled T cells were used for PCR amplification without intermediate steps. To enhance barcode recovery in experiments with samples with a lower GFP + cell count, barcode sequences were first captured from the obtained genomic DNA (gDNA) preparations, using biotinylated DNA capture oligonucleotides that anneal either 5′ or 3′ of the barcode sequence in the GFP gDNA (for oligonucleotide sequences, see ). If at least one sample in an experiment contained <3,000 GFP + cells, all samples in that experiment (independent of their GFP + cell count) were subjected to the barcode gDNA capture protocol, to avoid the possible generation of bias by this procedure. In brief, gDNA was sheared on the ME220 Focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris) under the following conditions: time, 20 s; peak power, 70; duty%, 20; cycles/burst, 1,000. Next, sheared gDNA was denatured and mixed 1:1 with hybridization buffer (1 ml composition: 667.6 μl of 20× SSPE [Gibco]; 267.6 μl of 50× Denhardt’s solution [Sigma-Aldrich]; 13.2 μl of 20% SDS [Sigma-Aldrich]; 26.8 μl of 0.5 M EDTA, pH 8.0; and 26.8 μl water supplemented with the biotinylated Capt_For_BClibv2 [50 fmol] and Capt_Rev_BClibv2 [50 fmol] oligonucleotides). Hybridization with biotinylated capture oligonucleotides was performed overnight at 65°C. The next day, Streptavidin beads (Dynabeads MyOne streptavidin T1; Invitrogen) were washed with 2× B&W buffer (2 M NaCl in TE buffer, pH 8.0) in low-retention microtubes (Axygen) that were prerinsed with 400 ml of 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, solution, and the hybridized gDNA was mixed with the streptavidin beads for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, bead-bound gDNA was isolated by magnetic pulldown using the Dynamag-2 magnet (Invitrogen). The isolated biotinylated gDNA beads were sequentially washed once with 500 μl of 1× B&W buffer (diluted in TE buffer, pH 8.0), 200 μl of 0.5× B&W buffer (diluted in Tris buffer, pH 8.0), 200 μl of 0.25× B&W buffer (diluted in Tris buffer, pH 8.0), and twice with 200 μl of 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0. The bead-bound gDNA was directly used for downstream PCR amplification.
 All samples were split into two separate technical replicates before the first PCR amplification. Genomic barcodes were amplified by nested PCRs using Taq polymerase (Invitrogen). First, the barcode sequence was amplified using the Top_Lib and Bot_Lib primers (30 cycles: 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 57.2°C, and 30 s at 72°C). Subsequently, PCR products were subjected to a second amplification (30 cycles: 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 57.2°C, and 30 s at 72°C) using the BC1v2_DS_For and BC1v2_DS_Rev primers that share the annealing sites of the Top_lib and Bot_lib primer, respectively, but are tailed with sequences representing the Illumina primer annealing sites. Finally, the resulting PCR products were subjected to a third amplification (15 cycles: 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 57.2°C, and 30 s at 72°C) using the P5_For and P7_index_Rev primers that are tailed with the P5 or P7 adaptors, respectively. The P7_index_Rev primer harbors a unique 7-bp index sequence that allows multiplexed analysis of ≤144 samples on one sequencing lane. The 7-bp indexes had a Levenshtein distance of ≥3 bp from each other to avoid incorrect assignment of reads due to PCR or sequence errors ( ). The final PCR products of individual samples were pooled, 322-bp fragments were purified using E-gel extraction (Invitrogen), and PCR products were sequenced on a HiSeq2500 Illumina platform with a read length of 65 bp. For primer sequences, see .

## Filtering of bulk lineage-tracing sequencing data
 The reads obtained after sequencing were mapped to the barcode reference library, and reads that showed a 100% match to the barcode constant region, an index sequence that corresponded to one of the indices used during the PCR amplification, and a full match to one of the 21-bp barcode sequences listed in the reference library were retained. Using these filtering steps, ∼150–190 million reads (75–95% of total reads) were considered of appropriate quality for downstream analysis.
 To determine barcode sampling efficiency in biological samples, reproducibility between technical replicates was analyzed, and biological samples were excluded from further analysis when the Spearman correlation coefficient between technical replicates was <0.7. Next, barcodes that were not detected in both technical replicates were excluded, removing on average 0.66% of the total reads (and hence inferred cell fraction) per biological sample. After removal of nonreproducibly detected barcodes, the normalized read counts of the barcodes detected in the two technical replicates were averaged. As an additional noise-filtering step, all barcodes that represented <0.01% of reads per sample were excluded. Finally, read counts were renormalized to 10,000, yielding values that represent relative T cell clone sizes in the biological samples. Data filtering and downstream analysis were performed in R version 3.6.0 ( https://www.r-project.org/ ).

## Bulk lineage-tracing data analysis after filtering
 To allow the visualization of clones with a read count of 0 on a log scale, read counts of all clones were plotted as read count + 1, but original read count values were used for all calculations. Correlations between samples were calculated over the barcodes that were shared between the two compared samples, using Spearman rank correlation. For data visualization, R (ggplot2 and pheatmap) and GraphPad Prism 7.03 were used.
 All ratios were calculated as: Clone Size SampleA /Clone Size SampleB , taking the inverse of this ratio if Clone Size SampleA was lower than Clone Size SampleB , ensuring all outcomes were ≥1. Nonshared barcodes were excluded from the ratio calculations.
 To determine the clonal bias threshold described in , technical replicate samples of all biological samples used in were used, with barcodes having a normalized read count of <0.5 excluded from the analysis. For all remaining barcodes, the ratio in read counts between technical replicates A and B was calculated, and a threshold was established such that 98% of barcodes detected in all technical replicates would have a ratio lower than this threshold ( ). This resulted in a clonal bias threshold of 4.8, indicating that a clone had to contribute ≥4.8 times more to one of the normalized cell compartments than to the other cell compartment to be considered biased. Biased clones that were detected only in either the T CIRCM or T RM compartment cannot be ascribed a read count ratio. To allow for the visualization of these clones in , we applied the formula (Clone Size TRM − Clone Size TCIRCM )/(Clone Size TRM + Clone Size TCIRCM ), resulting in values that range from −1 to 1, with −1 being completely biased toward T CIRCM formation and 1 being completely biased toward T RM formation.
 To allow statistical analysis of the magnitude of clonal disparity between different combinations of cell compartments, an additional measurement of disparity was established (applied in and ). Specifically, to compare the magnitude of the differences between sample A and two other samples (i.e., A−B versus A–C), all barcodes observed in samples A, B, and C were ranked in descending order based on the normalized read counts observed in sample A (reference sample), taking along shared and nonshared barcodes detected in the biological samples. Next, the cumulative read count of the ordered barcodes in sample A was plotted against the cumulative read counts in sample A (providing a reference curve) and against the cumulative read counts in samples B and C ( ). The level of disparity was then determined by calculating the area between the reference curve and the curves obtained for samples B and C. In this analysis, a value of 0 signifies that samples are fully identical with respect to clonal composition, and a value of 0.5 signifies a complete lack of overlap between samples.

## Modeling stochastic survival of memory T cells
 To model the composition of a memory T cell pool that is purely formed by the stochastic survival of T EFF cells, random in silico sampling of barcodes detected in the effector cell pool present in peripheral blood was conducted ( ). Specifically, to mimic stochastic memory formation, the probability of a clone surviving was considered to be directly proportional to its relative contribution to the effector pool (i.e., if a clone represented 50% of the total T EFF pool, the probability of its offspring to be sampled per draw would be 0.5). In silico modeling of the memory pool of four mice was performed using the following conditions: (1) by drawing a number of cells that was equal to the number of experimentally observed T RM and T CIRCM cells; (2) by drawing a number of cells that was equal to a fraction 0.1 of the number of experimentally observed T RM and T CIRCM cells; and (3) by drawing a number of cells that was equal to the number of experimentally observed barcodes in the T RM and T CIRCM pool. The first setting models a situation in which the memory compartment is derived from the effector compartment without any further proliferation. The second setting models a situation in which the memory compartment is formed by a combination of cell death and expansion. The third scenario represents the most extreme bottleneck scenario in which each barcode observed in a memory compartment would be derived from a single cell that survived after the effector phase. Notably, for the second and third setting, we assumed that the final T RM pool is formed by proliferation of the drawn founder pool, and that during this expansion the hierarchy between founder clones does not alter. For the three settings, sampling was performed 1,000 times with replacement. To measure the resemblance of the modeled memory pool with the experimentally observed effector pool, Spearman correlations were calculated over the relative sizes of all clones and compared with the correlation between the experimentally observed effector pool and experimentally observed memory pool.

## Single-cell barcode amplification from cDNA
 From three vaccinated recipient mice, day-12 effector phase blood (300 μl) was collected and subsequently stained with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies directed against CD8, CD45.2, and Vβ5 ( ). In addition, each individual blood sample was stained with distinct anti-mouse TotalSeq Hashtag antibodies (TotalSeq-A0301, TotalSeq-A0302, TotalSeq-A0303; BioLegend). After isolation of CD8 + CD45.2 + Vβ5 + GFP + cells (considered barcode-labeled OT-I T cells) by FACS sorting on a FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences), cells derived from the three mice were mixed 1:1:1 and taken up in PBS supplemented with 0.04% BSA. Next, single-cell RNA isolation and cDNA generation were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol of the 10X Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ kit. Before the fragmentation step described in the manufacturer’s protocol, 20% of the amplified cDNA was taken out and used to specifically PCR amplify barcode sequences. Primers for barcode amplification were designed such that the cellcode and unique molecular identifier (UMI) sequence are both preserved in the amplified product. Barcodes were amplified using Q5 high-fidelity DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) in two consecutive amplification rounds to make the product compatible with the Illumina sequencing platform. First, the barcode sequence was amplified using cDNA_r1_for and cDNA_r1_rev primers ( ); both primers were tailed with the Illumina sequencing primer annealing sites. Second, the resulting PCR products were amplified using the cDNA_r2_for and cDNA_r2_rev primers to add the P5 and P7 adaptors to the products. Products were subsequently sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq Micro platform. After sequencing, the transcripts with a read count of >4 were mapped to the barcode reference library, and transcripts that showed a 100% match to the barcode constant region and fully matched one of the 21-bp barcode sequences listed in the reference library were retained for downstream analysis.

## scRNA-seq analysis
 For analysis of single-cell transcriptomes, 25% of the single-cell cDNA library, generated according to the manufacturer’s protocol of the 10X Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ kit, was sequenced on a NextSeq550 Sequencing System (Illumina), resulting in the acquisition of a total of ∼400 million reads, and the detection of 6,173 cells, with a median of 2,400 genes detected per cell. Feature-barcode matrices were generated using the Cell Ranger software of the 10X Genomics Chromium pipeline. Cells that could be assigned to multiple mice or to no mouse (inferred from the detection of multiple or no Hashtags), cells with a transcript (UMI) count <2,000 or a mitochondrial gene fraction >0.075 were excluded from downstream analysis. Furthermore, cells that transcriptionally resembled B cells ( n = 79, as determined by CD19 expression), erythrocytes ( n = 11, as determined by expression of Hbb-bs/Hba-a1/Hbb-bt/Hbba-a2), or thrombocytes ( n = 96, as determined by Ppbp/Pf4 expression) were excluded from the analysis. For further transcriptional profiling of the remaining 5,383 cells, the Seurat ( ) and MC ( ) algorithms were used.
 Data from single-cell barcode sequencing and scRNAseq were merged based on matching of cell code sequences, and bulk DNA barcode sequencing data (of T EFF , T RM , and T CIRCM samples) was combined with single-cell data by matching barcode sequences to scRNA-derived barcode sequences. Clones were included for downstream analysis when transcriptional profiles were determined of three or more cells and when clones were also detected in the bulk DNA T EFF , T RM , or T CIRCM barcode sequencing data.
 For analysis of differential expression of T RM - and T CIRCM -associated genes in the circulating effector phase compartment, as described in , the top 10 most T RM - and T CIRCM -biased clones were selected, and mean gene expression per clone was calculated. Next, the average mean expression of the 10 T RM- and the 10 T CIRCM - biased clones was calculated for the core T RM and T CIRCM genes ( ). To exclude lowly expressed genes that are inherently prone to show more noise, only genes with a mean expression level >0.1 normalized UMI count (calculated over all individual clones) are depicted in .

## Statistics
 Statistical analyses were performed using the two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons test, and Spearman correlation test, using R and GraphPad Prism 7.03. Results were regarded as statistically significant at a P value of <0.05, with *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; and ***, P < 0.0005.

## Data and code availability
 Single-cell transcriptome data have been deposited in GEO under accession no. GSE152282 . All other source data and codes are available upon reasonable request.

## Online supplemental material
 shows quality controls of barcode quantification in skin and circulation during the effector phase. describes the barcode filtering strategy and bias threshold determination. shows the contribution of T cell clones to the T RM and T CIRCM pool in relation to their clonal burst size. presents quality controls of the scRNA-seq analysis and the relation between T EFF subset production and memory generation potential of individual clones. demonstrates the occurrence of de novo T RM generation upon secondary vaccination at previously unperturbed skin sites. describes the core T RM and T CIRCM genes depicted in . describes the primer and DNA-oligonucleotide sequences used to generate the barcode library and to amplify barcode sequences from biological samples. provides details on the fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies used for flow-cytometric analysis.

## Supplementary Material
 Table S1 shows core T RM and T CIRCM genes.
 Click here for additional data file.
 Table S2 presents oligo-DNA and primer sequences used to generate the barcode library and to PCR-amplify barcode sequences from biological samples.
 Click here for additional data file.
 Table S3 lists fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies used for flow-cytometric analysis.
 Click here for additional data file.