
 Clonal lineage tracing of innate immune cells in human cancer - PMC
 Skip to main content
 An official website of the United States government
 Here's how you know 
 Here's how you know 
 Official websites use .gov 
 A
 .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States.
 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
 A lock (
 Lock 
 Locked padlock icon
 ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites.
 Search
 Log in 
 Dashboard
 Publications
 Account settings
 Log out
 Search…
 Search NCBI
 Primary site navigation
 Search
 Logged in as:
 Dashboard
 Publications
 Account settings
 Log in
 Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
 Search in PMC 
 Journal List
 User Guide
 PERMALINK 
 Copy 
 As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
 Learn more:
 PMC Disclaimer 
 |
 PMC Copyright Notice
 Cancer Cell . Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2026 Jun 27. 
 Published in final edited form as: Cancer Cell. 2026 Jun 4;44(7):1509–1521.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2026.05.006 
 Search in PMC 
 Search in PubMed 
 View in NLM Catalog 
 Add to search 
 Clonal lineage tracing of innate immune cells in human cancer 
 Vincent Liu 
 Vincent Liu 
 1 Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Vincent Liu 
 1, 2, 3, * , Katalin Sandor 
 Katalin Sandor 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Katalin Sandor 
 2, 3 , Patrick K Yan 
 Patrick K Yan 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Patrick K Yan 
 2, 3 , Zhuang Miao 
 Zhuang Miao 
 1 Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Zhuang Miao 
 1, 2, 3 , Yajie Yin 
 Yajie Yin 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Yajie Yin 
 2, 3 , Robert R Stickels 
 Robert R Stickels 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Robert R Stickels 
 2, 3 , Andy Y Chen 
 Andy Y Chen 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 4 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Andy Y Chen 
 2, 3, 4 , Kamir Hiam-Galvez 
 Kamir Hiam-Galvez 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Kamir Hiam-Galvez 
 2, 3 , Jacob Gutierrez 
 Jacob Gutierrez 
 5 Computational and Systems Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA 
 Find articles by Jacob Gutierrez 
 5 , Wenxi Zhang 
 Wenxi Zhang 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Wenxi Zhang 
 2, 3 , Sairaj M Sajjath 
 Sairaj M Sajjath 
 6 Robin Chemers Neustein Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA 
 Find articles by Sairaj M Sajjath 
 6 , Raeline Valbuena 
 Raeline Valbuena 
 1 Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Raeline Valbuena 
 1 , Steven Wang 
 Steven Wang 
 1 Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Steven Wang 
 1 , Bence Daniel 
 Bence Daniel 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Bence Daniel 
 2, 3 , Leif S Ludwig 
 Leif S Ludwig 
 7 Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10178 Berlin, Germany 
 8 Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC) Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), 10115 Berlin, Germany 
 Find articles by Leif S Ludwig 
 7, 8 , Brooke E Howitt 
 Brooke E Howitt 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 Find articles by Brooke E Howitt 
 2 , Caleb A Lareau 
 Caleb A Lareau 
 5 Computational and Systems Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA 
 Find articles by Caleb A Lareau 
 5, * , Ansuman T Satpathy 
 Ansuman T Satpathy 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 9 Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA 94129, USA 
 10 Lead contact 
 Find articles by Ansuman T Satpathy 
 2, 3, 9, 10, * 
 Author information 
 Article notes 
 Copyright and License information 
 1 Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 3 Center for Immunotherapy Design, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 4 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
 5 Computational and Systems Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA 
 6 Robin Chemers Neustein Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA 
 7 Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10178 Berlin, Germany 
 8 Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC) Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), 10115 Berlin, Germany 
 9 Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, CA 94129, USA 
 10 Lead contact 
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
 V.L. conceived and designed the study with input from C.A.L. and A.T.S.; V.L., C.A.L., and A.T.S. supervised the work; V.L., K.S., P.K.Y., Z.M., Y.Y., R.R.S., K.H.-G., and W.Z. performed experiments and/or assisted with procurement of biospecimens; V.L. and C.A.L. led bioinformatics analyses with input from A.Y.C. and J.G.; S.M.S., R.V., S.W., B.D., and L.S.L. aided in the interpretation of data; B.E.H. provided pathological analyses of resected tissues; V.L., C.A.L., and A.T.S. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. 
 * Correspondence: liuv@stanford.edu (V.L.), lareauc@mskcc.org (C.A.L.), satpathy@stanford.edu (A.T.S.) 
 Issue date 2026 Jul 13. 
 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
 PMC Copyright notice 
 PMCID: PMC13309241  NIHMSID: NIHMS2184724  PMID: 42242233 
 The publisher's version of this article is available at Cancer Cell 
 Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on July 21, 2025: " Clonal lineage tracing of innate immune cells in human cancer ". 
 SUMMARY 
 Innate immune cells constitute the majority of the tumor microenvironment (TME) and mediate anti-tumor immunity and immunotherapy responses. While single-cell T and B cell receptor sequencing have revealed insights into the clonal dynamics of adaptive immunity, the lack of analogous tools has precluded similar analysis of innate immune cells. Here, we describe a method leveraging somatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations to reconstruct clonal lineage relationships between cells in native human tissues. By jointly profiling single-cell chromatin accessibility and mtDNA variants, we resolve clonal dynamics of 218,715 cells from matched tumors, tissues, and blood from patients with lung and ovarian cancers. Clonal tracing reveals that TME-resident myeloid subsets, including macrophages and type 3 dendritic cells (DC3), are clonally related to circulating and tissue-infiltrating monocytes. We further identify distinct DC-biased and macrophage-biased clones, whose circulating monocyte precursors exhibit distinct epigenetic profiles, suggesting intratumoral myeloid differentiation fate may be peripherally programmed before TME infiltration. In brief 
 Liu et al. develop Mitotrek, a method that uses single-cell multi-omics with mitochondrial DNA clonal tracing to map the clonal origins of innate immune cells in human tumors. They reveal that tumor myeloid populations arise from circulating monocytes with pre-existing epigenetic fate biases, suggesting that tumor immunity is shaped before tumor infiltration. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a dynamic ecosystem that maintains a close connection to the peripheral immune system through the bloodstream. Circulating immune cells continually infiltrate the TME, where their capacity to differentiate and expand shapes anti-tumor immunity and therapy response. Lineage tracing methods such as paired single-cell RNA and TCR sequencing (scRNA/TCR-seq) have advanced understanding of the expansion potential, tissue distribution, and clonal dynamics of immune populations in patients. 1 , 2 For example, we and others have applied scRNA/TCR-seq to show that peripherally expanded, tumor-specific CD8 + T cell clones replace dysfunctional exhausted T cells in the tumor, which is essential to immune checkpoint blockade response. 3 – 5 However, similar lineage-tracing approaches have not been feasible for non-adaptive immune populations due to the absence of somatic recombination events during their development. 
 Innate immune cells, including myeloid cells, are among the most abundant immune cell types in the TME 6 and are ontogenetically diverse, consisting of both tissue-resident and circulating bone marrow-derived compartments. 7 Although phenotypic and quantitative maps have delineated their diversity across tissues and cancer types, 8 – 11 and there is growing recognition that ontogeny plays a key role in shaping their function within the TME, 12 , 13 the inability to connect cellular phenotype and lineage within native human tissues leaves several open questions. First, do innate immune cells have an intrinsic tissue site preference for infiltration, differentiation, or expansion? Second, do they face clonally selective pressures in the TME, analogous to those experienced by T and B cells? Finally, what specific lineage relationships connect the diverse innate immune constituents within the TME, and what are their ontogenetic origins? 
 Somatic mtDNA variants have been established as endogenous lineage markers, as the high mutation rate of mtDNA relative to nuclear DNA drives the accumulation of lineage-distinguishing mutations over time. 14 , 15 Recent advancements in single-cell sequencing have enabled the detection of mtDNA mutations 16 – 19 allowing comprehensive, simultaneous lineage and epigenetic profiling of thousands of clonotypes across cell types, tissue sites, and cancer types. Therefore, to address these fundamental questions regarding innate immune cell clonality and ontogeny, we performed mitochondrial single-cell assay for transposase accessible chromatin by sequencing (mtscA-TAC-seq) on 218,715 cells from tumor, non-involved lung tissue (NILT), and/or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with lung or ovarian cancer to provide a clonally resolved view of the human innate immune response to cancer. RESULTS 
 Development of Mitotrek to recover single-cell clonal relationships 
 To establish a lineage tracing method applicable to donor-matched solid tissue and blood samples and to clonally link immune cells across tissue sites, we applied mtscATAC-seq to profile five patients with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who had undergone therapeutic lobectomy, spanning adenocarcinoma (SU-L-002, SU-L-004, SU-L-005; treatment-naïve), squamous cell carcinoma (SU-L-001; post-neoadjuvant chemotherapy), and neuroendocrine (SU-L-003) histologies ( Figures 1A and S1A ; Table S1 ; methods ). To investigate whether distinct TMEs influence immune clonal architecture, we complemented the NSCLC dataset, characterized by high mutational burden and strong immune infiltration, 20 , 21 with mtscATAC-seq data from five ovarian cancer patients, which typically exhibit a more immunosuppressive TME 22 ( Figure S1B ; Table S1 ). Fresh samples were dissociated and used to generate single-cell ATAC and mtDNA genome-sequencing libraries, enabling simultaneous recovery of chromatin accessibility profiles and mtDNA genotypes from individual cells. 
 Figure 1. Creating a lineage-embedded atlas of NSCLC from mitochondrial DNA with Mitotrek. 
 Open in a new tab 
 (A) Schematic of simultaneous single-cell epigenetic profiling and clone tracing in patients with early-stage NSCLC. The chromatin accessibility profile and mitochondrial mutations are recovered from each cell. 
 (B) Schematic of clone calling from mitochondrial variants using Mitotrek. 
 (C) Benchmarking Mitotrek on gold-standard HSPC colony data. 
 (D) Same as (C) but for a second HSPC donor. 
 (E) Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) of 83,371 cells in lung tumor and non-involved lung tissue (NILT). 
 (F) UMAP of cells colored by tissue type (top) and patient identity (bottom). 
 (G) Normalized bar plot showing cell type composition for each patient, partitioned by tumor and non-involved lung. 
 (H) Distribution of the proportion of cells within each clone (≥3 cells) that share the most common cell type for that clone compared to permuted data from the same samples. N = number of clones, Kruskal-Wallis test. Boxplots: center line, median; box limits, first and third quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. 
 (I) Clone associations with cell type. p values represent the Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted Kruskal-Wallis test against overall cell type proportions for clones with at least five cells. Clones shown in (J) are highlighted in red. 
 (J) Representative clones capturing clonal expansion (tumor, CD8+ T, NK, and epithelial) or differentiation (B/plasma and monocyte/macrophage) events in tumor and NILT. See also Figures S1 and S2 ; Tables S1 and S2 . In the lung cancer cohort, we obtained mtscATAC-seq profiles from 83,371 immune, malignant, and stromal cells from tumor and NILT, and 41,587 profiles from peripheral blood. In the ovarian cancer cohort, we profiled 52,154 immune, malignant, and stromal cells from ovarian tumors and 41,603 PBMCs ( Table S2 ; Figure S1C ). For one patient (SU-O-002), we additionally generated paired scRNA/TCR-seq data from 6,982 cells spanning peripheral blood and tumor, with TCR-mtDNA correspondence supporting clonal barcoding of immune cells in this dataset 16 ( Figure S1D ; methods ). We recovered 10,584 high-confidence somatic mtDNA mutations present at low pseudobulk frequencies (<1%) as determined by mgatk 17 ( Figure S1E ), a computational pipeline to process mitochondrial reads and generate heteroplasmy estimates from mtscATAC-seq data. Variants with >1% pseudobulk frequencies, accounting for 0.76% of all variants detected, were broadly distributed across cell types and tissue sites, likely representing early-developmental or zygotic mutations 23 that are not informative for resolving recent immune lineage relationships ( Figure S1F ), and were therefore excluded from downstream analysis. 
 Analysis of heteroplasmy distributions revealed that mtDNA variants detected at high allele frequencies in solid tissue cells were more frequently shared across cells, including from other lineages, than in matching PBMC samples, likely due to both technical artifacts (e.g., uptake of ambient mtDNA during single-cell capture 24 ) and biological phenomena (e.g., horizontal mitochondrial transfer events 25 ) that are unlikely to reflect bona fide clonal relationships and may be unique to solid tumor profiling 18 , 26 , 27 ( Figures S1G – S1L ). To mitigate such spurious lineage inferences, we developed Mitotrek, a computational framework that assigns cells to high-confidence clones by prioritizing clonal accuracy over sensitivity ( Figure 1B ; methods ). Briefly, Mitotrek: (1) reformats cell-by-variant heteroplasmy data into a binary ‘‘positive-unlabeled’’ matrix using empirically defined thresholds to account for measurement noise from genetic drift 28 and variable sequencing depth, (2) discards variants detected in >20% of cells within a sample, which are likely to generate artifactual linkages, and (3) excludes cells assigned to multiple clones to avoid contamination by non-informative variants of technical or biological origin. Subclonal structure was not explored due to the difficulty in establishing true clonal hierarchy, and potential subclonal relationships were collapsed to single clones by merging highly correlated variants. Benchmarking Mitotrek on full-length scRNA-seq data from single-colony hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) with known clonal identities 16 yielded assignment accuracies of 91.3% and 85.3% for two independent donors ( Figures 1C , 1D , S1M , and S1N ), establishing Mitotrek as a high-accuracy framework for resolving clonal relationships in solid human tissues. Constructing multi-modal atlases of NSCLC and ovarian cancer 
 We next constructed a single-cell epigenetic atlas of NSCLC by iteratively clustering scATAC-seq profiles from tumor and NILT samples, identifying 53 cell clusters spanning malignant tumor, epithelial, stromal, T cell, NK/ILC, myeloid, B cell, and plasma cell populations ( Figures 1E ; Figure S2A ). All non-malignant cell-type annotations contained cells from multiple donors, consistent with interpatient heterogeneity, 29 and cell-type assignments aligned with surface markers used for enrichment ( Figures 1F and S2B ). Cell-type distributions in tumor and NILT samples matched previous transcriptomic and proteomic datasets 8 , 30 ( Figure 1G ). In patient-matched PBMCs, we recovered all major immune populations with the expected absence of tissue-resident myeloid subsets, and additionally identified circulating HSPCs ( Figures S2C – S2F ), enabling unbiased downstream lineage analysis. 
 Applying Mitotrek to the NSCLC dataset, we recovered 5,146 clones comprising 29,010 cells (23.2% of cells passing scATAC-seq QC filters), of which 3,190 clones (62%) contained ≥3 cells and 573 (11%) contained ≥10 cells. The number of clones recovered per patient (440–2,146) was highly correlated with cell recovery (R = 0.90; Figure S2G ), and clone assignment rates were consistent across cell types and tissue sites, ranging from 15% to 26% in tumor/NILT and 20%–32% in PBMC ( Figures S2H and S2I ), with the fraction of multi-assigned cells decreasing with clone size ( Figures S2J and S2K ). Globally, cells within the same clone were significantly more likely to share a cell type than randomly grouped cells across all tissues ( Figure 1H ), reflecting lineage fidelity and supporting the validity of Mitotrek-assigned clones. A clone-level cell type association analysis identified 226 clones (20% of clones with ≥5 cells) whose compositions significantly deviated from the background distribution (Padj < 0.05; Figure 1I ), capturing key expansion and differentiation events across immune, stromal, and epithelial compartments ( Figure 1J ). 
 Iterative clustering of ovarian tumor cells identified 40 clusters across the same broad cell type categories ( Figures S3A – S3E ). Mitotrek recovered 4,560 clones comprising 20,713 cells, of which 2,389 clones (53%) contained ≥3 cells and 287 clones (6%) contained ≥10 cells. The number of clones recovered per patient ranged from 61 to 1.487 ( Figure S3F ). Consistent with our observations in the NSCLC dataset, clone counts were strongly correlated with cell recovery per patient (R = 0.93), and clone assignment rates were uniform across cell types and tissue sites ( Figures S3F – S3J ). Together, the lineage-embedded NSCLC and ovarian tumor datasets provide a robust framework for dissecting lineage dynamics across distinct TMEs. Immune clonal landscapes across distinct tissue sites reveal a diverse clonal repertoire of tissue-infiltrating myeloid cells 
 As mtscATAC-seq enables a measure of clonal diversity across all cell states, we assessed the relative clone sizes of both immune and tumor cells from NSCLC and ovarian cancer samples. We quantified the distribution of clone fractions by cell type, reasoning that high per-clone fractions reflect cell type-specific clonal expansion events and noting that mitochondrial lineage tracing is particularly adept at marking clonal expansions 31 ( Figures 2A and S3K ). Overall, tumor cells and adaptive immune cells, including T cells, B cells, and plasma cells, comprised the largest clones observed in both lung and ovarian tumors ( Figures 2B and S4A ). Among clones composed of ≥80% of a single cell type (≥3 cells per clone), lung tumors were dominated by tumor cells, CD8 + T cells, CD4 + T cells, and B/plasma cells, whereas ovarian tumors had notably lower representation of CD4 + T cells, suggesting that clonally expanded CD4 + T cells are more prominent in the lung TME ( Figures S4B – S4F ). This inference was corroborated by matched ovarian tumor scRNA/TCR-seq, which showed markedly reduced clone sizes for CD4 + compared to CD8 + T cells (mean 7.6 vs. 25.4 cells per TCR clone; Student’s t test p = 0.029; Figure S4G ). 
 Figure 2. Cross-tissue clonal landscape of tumor-infiltrating immune cells. 
 Open in a new tab 
 (A) Cumulative fractions of clones stratified by cell type for cells from lung tumor (top) and NILT (bottom). Clones with ≥5 cells are considered for this analysis. 
 (B) Cell types of single cells belonging to the same clone. The top five most abundant clones with the most common cell type >70% for each patient in the indicated sample are shown. Each bar is colored by cell types of single cells within the clone. 
 (C) Clones enriched in tumor, as determined by p value < 0.05 from Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted Fisher’s exact test against overall tissue site distribution for clones with at least 10 cells in tumor and NILT. Each column represents a unique clone. 
 (D) Same as in (C) but for the NILT. 
 (E) Heatmaps showing the fraction of all cell pairs belonging to the same clone and consisting of two cell types within lung tumor (left) and NILT (right). Pairs were restricted to cells from the same donor. 
 (F) Heatmap showing the fraction of all cell pairs belonging to the same clone and consisting of a lung tumor cell type and a NILT cell type. 
 (G) Comparison and overlap of clones (≥3 cells for the indicated cell type) for myeloid, CD8+ T, and CD4+ T. Myeloid consists of monocyte, macrophage, and DC. n = number of clones considered for each cell type. See also Figures S3 – S7 Myeloid populations, including monocytes, macrophages, and DCs, exhibited smaller clone fractions, compared to adaptive immune cells. Among clones with a substantial number (≥5) of myeloid cells detected in lung tumors, the mean myeloid fraction was 58.5%. In contrast, clones with a substantial number of CD4 + T cells, CD8 + T cells, and B/plasma cells exhibited higher mean fractions of 78.7%, 78.3%, and 62.1% of the corresponding cell types ( Figure S4H ). Similar patterns were observed in ovarian tumors, except for the lower level of clonal expansion of CD4 + T cells ( Figures S4I – S4K ). These data provide direct evidence that sustained clonal expansion of human myeloid cells following bone marrow egress is limited, compared to lymphoid cell types, which clonally expand following antigen recognition. Notably, we observed oligoclonal NK cell expansions in one ovarian tumor (SU-O-005), consistent with adaptive-like NK responses reported in other contexts 26 , 32 – 35 ( Figures S5A – S5D ). 
 We next compared the clonal landscape of lung tumors to the paired normal lung tissue environment. Overall, clone sizes were correlated across tissue types, with the strongest concordance observed between NILT and blood and weaker correlation between blood and tumor ( Figure S6A ). We classified clones with ≥10 cells based on their enrichment in tumor versus NILT ( Figure S6B ). Tumor-enriched clones were dominated by tumor cells as well as CD4 + T, CD8 + T, and B/plasma cells, with the adaptive immune clones largely restricted to the tumor site ( Figure 2C ). In contrast, NILT-enriched clones included a broader range of cell types with higher representation across tissue sites ( Figure 2D ), including clones predominantly composed of invariant NK/T cells and monocytes that were minimally observed in tumor-enriched clones. NILT-enriched clones also showed greater cellular heterogeneity than tumor-enriched clones ( Figure S6C ), consistent with reduced clonal expansion in the normal lung tissue environment. 
 Among the 186 clones that were not preferentially enriched in either tumor or NILT, most were dominated by CD4 + or CD8 + T cells ( Figure S6D ) and were detected across tumor, NILT, and peripheral blood, consistent with previous reports demonstrating concordance between peripheral and intratumoral T cell clone sizes. 3 , 4 In contrast, B cell and plasma cell-dominated clones were restricted to either tumor or NILT, suggesting that B and plasma cell expansion is locally confined. A complementary analysis of PBMC-enriched clones identified 14 clones dominated by CD8 + T and NK cells, the majority of which were also detected at lower frequencies in tumor and NILT, indicating their capacity for tissue infiltration ( Figure S6E ). Together, these results provide a comprehensive view of immune clonal composition across the human TME and periphery. Inter-cell type clonal relationships reveal broad tissue distribution of bone marrow-derived myeloid cells 
 Next, we systematically quantified lineage relationships and differentiation patterns between cell types within and across tissue sites. We aggregated all clonotypes for each pair of cell types (including self-self pairs) and measured the fraction of clones shared across distinct cell-pair combinations, reasoning that two cell types were more related if they more frequently shared clonotypes ( Figures 2E and S7A ; methods ). Across all tissue samples, we identified three broad patterns: (1) innate immune cells (monocytes, macrophages, DCs, and NK cells) consistently exhibited high intra-group clone sharing, consistent with recent hematopoietic output without substantial clonal bottlenecks prior to tissue infiltration, (2) adaptive immune cells and tumor cells showed high intra-cell type clone sharing, reflecting histories of clonal selection and expansion, and (3) stromal cells (endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and non-tumor epithelial cells) displayed intermediate levels, consistent with their distant embryonic origins relative to HSPC-derived immune cells. Analogous patterns were observed in PBMCs ( Figure S7B ). Notable exceptions included non-regulatory CD4 + T cells, which exhibited minimal intra-cell type clone sharing despite the expansion of select clones, indicating broader clonal diversity, and endothelial cells, which displayed particularly high intra-cell type sharing in lung and ovarian tumors but not NILT, consistent with the angiogenic processes indispensable for tumor formation. 
 We next quantified lineage relationships between cell types across patient-matched lung tumors, NILT, and peripheral blood. Among adaptive immune cells, only CD8 + T cells consistently exhibited high clone sharing across tissue sites, suggesting that peripheral expansion during the anti-tumor response is unique to this population ( Figures 2F and S7C ). In contrast, B and plasma cells across tissues were clonally distinct, supporting the notion that B cell-mediated immunity is locally orchestrated, as has been recently noted in the context of infection. 36 Among myeloid cells, we observed the greatest degree of clone sharing across tissue sites, suggesting that these cells readily infiltrate and differentiate in tissue following bone marrow myelopoiesis and egress. Indeed, myeloid-dominated clones spanning multiple tissue sites were the most frequently detected in the NSCLC dataset (27% myeloid clones compared to 8% CD8 + T cell clones and 16% CD4 + T cell clones; Figure 2G ). Together, these findings emphasize the distinct clonal dynamics of adaptive and innate immune cells in anti-tumor immunity, highlighting the systemic nature of CD8 + T cell responses in contrast to the locally restricted nature of B cell responses, and revealing the extensive tissue infiltration and differentiation capacity of bone marrow-derived myeloid cells. Intratumoral DC3s are epigenetically and clonally linked to circulating monocytes 
 It has been reported that specific subpopulations of circulating myeloid cells give rise to tumor-resident mononuclear phagocyte (MNP) populations that critically shape the TME. 13 , 37 , 38 In particular, human DC3s have been identified as a CD1c + dendritic cell subset distinct from cDC2s and enriched in NSCLC tumors, and have been suggested to uniquely prime tissue-resident CD8 + T cells. 30 , 39 – 42 However, the epigenetic and ontogenetic relationships between human DC3s and other MNPs remain undefined. Given the broad tissue distribution of bone marrow-derived myeloid cells, we sought to understand the differentiation trajectories of circulating myeloid populations and clonally link them to those in the TME. To achieve higher granularity for myeloid cell type annotation, we iteratively re-clustered 21,676 myeloid cells from lung tumor, NILT, and peripheral blood in the NSCLC cohort into 13 distinct clusters, including classical (CD14 + ) and non-classical (CD16 + ) monocytes, alveolar macrophages (AMΦ), interstitial macrophages (IMΦ), two monocyte-derived macrophage populations (MoMΦ1 and MoMΦ2), and DC subsets including cDC1, cDC2, mature DC enriched in regulatory molecules (mregDC), 9 , 43 , 44 and DC3s 30 ( Figures 3A , 3B , and S8A – S8C ; methods ). Annotations were validated using gene signatures derived from joint single-cell transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of human lung myeloid cells from 35 NSCLC tumors and 29 patient-matched NILTs 30 ( Figures S8D and S8E ), and were consistent with previous characterizations of human lung tumors and NILTs. 
 Figure 3. Intratumoral DC3s are epigenetically and clonally related to monocytes. 
 Open in a new tab 
 (A) UMAP of myeloid cells from PBMC, lung tumor, and NILT samples of patients with lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). 
 (B) Column-scaled gene accessibility scores and detection frequencies for the indicated genes. 
 (C) (Left) Heatmap showing marker peaks for all myeloid cell types. The color indicates column-scaled, mean-adjusted number of reads detected in each peak. (Right) Representative TF motifs that are significantly enriched for monocyte, macrophage, and DC. 
 (D) Differentially active TF motifs between DC2 and DC3. p values are calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted Kruskal-Wallis test. 
 (E) Same as (D) but comparing DC2 and CD14+ monocytes. 
(F) Same as (D) but highlighting DC3-up TF motifs with increased accessibility. 
 (G and H) Average chromVAR motif deviation scores for monocyte and macrophage TF motifs highlighted in (C). Kruskal-Wallis test. 
 (I) Chromatin accessibility tracks for the CEBPB locus for the indicated cell types. 
 (J) Cell type-cell type clone frequency correlation across clones (≥5 cells across all samples). Color denotes correlation value, computed using Pearson’s ρ (upper half), and Kendall’s τ (bottom half). Text labels of circulating PBMC cell types are colored pink. 
 (K) Scatterplots comparing clone frequencies of circulating CD14+ monocytes with those of tissue CD14+ monocytes (left), DC3 (middle), and tissue CD8+ T cells (right). 
 (L) 231 distinct cell type pairs ordered by clone frequency correlation. DC3-monocyte interactions are highlighted in red. 
 (M) Representative clones consisting of DC3 and monocytes. For each clone, cell types with at least two cells are highlighted. See also Figures S8 – S10 . Despite extensive transcriptomic and proteomic characterization of lung myeloid cells, the corresponding epigenetic landscape remains understudied. We used ArchR 45 to identify differentially accessible regions (DARs) specific to each myeloid cell subtype. Although subtypes exhibited distinct epigenetic profiles, hierarchical clustering grouped them into three broader categories reflecting their myeloid lineage, with IMΦ cells excluded from downstream analyses due to their rarity across donors (96% originated from a single donor; Figure 3C ). Transcription factor (TF) motif enrichment analysis of subtype-specific DARs recapitulated established lineage-defining programs, including CEBP motifs in monocytes, 46 – 52 AP-1 and metabolic receptor family (RXR, PPAR, and LXRα) motifs in macrophages, 48 – 51 , 53 – 60 and canonical DC TFs (BCL11A, IRF4/8, RUNX, CBFB, and NF-κB) in DCs 48 – 51 , 61 – 63 ( Figures S8F and S8G ). 
 Unlike cDC2 DARs, DC3-enriched DARs exhibited significantly greater accessibility in monocytes and macrophages ( Figures S9A and S9B ), and CD14 + monocyte DARs were more accessible in DC3s than in other DC subtypes ( Figure S9C ), suggesting that DC3s retain monocytic epigenetic features. TF motif analysis of DC3 DARs revealed increased accessibility for motifs associated with monocyte and macrophage TF families, including AP-1, MAF, and MiT-TFE ( Figures 3D – 3F ). Using chromVAR, we inferred per-cell TF activity and observed concurrent activation of monocyte-, macrophage-, and DC-associated TF programs in DC3s ( Figures 3G – 3I and S9D ), with CD14 + but not CD16 + monocytes showing anti-correlated accessibility of monocyte- versus DC-associated motifs, suggestive of transitional states during monocyte-to-DC differentiation ( Figures S9E and S9F ). Increased RNA expression of AP-1 family members in DC3s from published scRNA-seq data 30 further supported these observations ( Figure S9G ). Collectively, DC3s harbor monocytic epigenetic features indicative of a shared ontogeny distinct from classical DCs. 
 To reconstruct lineage relationships between DC3s and other immune subsets independent of epigenetic profiles, we analyzed clonal frequency correlations across immune subtypes, reasoning that ontogenetically related populations are also clonally related. As expected, lineage proximity between circulating and tissue-infiltrating monocytes was recapitulated ( Figure 3J ). Strikingly, DC3s clustered closely with monocytes and MoMΦs ( Figures 3K and 3L ), whereas cDC2s were less clonally related to monocytes ( Figure S9H ). For example, a representative clone defined by the 3068G>A mtDNA mutation showed 35 CD14 + monocytes in the peripheral blood, 41 CD14 + monocytes in the tissue, and 13 DC3s in the tumor and NILT, likely reflecting continuous infiltration and differentiation ( Figure 3M ). These findings were recapitulated in ovarian tumors, where intratumoral DC3s showed similar monocyte/macrophage TF-motif enrichment, concordant chromVAR activity, and clonal proximity to circulating monocytes ( Figures S10A – S10J ), suggesting the monocyte-DC3 connection is tumor-agnostic. Biased monocyte differentiation fates peripherally reprogram the tumor myeloid compartment 
 While circulating monocytes have the capacity to differentiate into either macrophages or DCs as they infiltrate inflamed tissue, 53 , 57 , 63 – 65 it is not clear whether differentiation fates are entirely dictated by the tissue environment or there is cell-intrinsic bias in the context of human cancer. To address this question, we next asked whether myeloid clones displayed tissue-specific differentiation preferences by comparing their frequencies across lung tumor, NILT, and peripheral blood ( Figures 4A , 4B , S11A , and S11B ). Overall, clone frequencies were highly correlated across sites, and the largest clones in tumors and NILT were also detected in blood, indicating infiltration from circulation without tissue site-specific expansion biases. However, within clones, monocytes were proportionally more abundant in NILT, whereas differentiated macrophages and DCs were enriched in tumors ( Figures 4C , 4D , and S11C ). These observations are consistent with the notion that TME promotes monocyte differentiation, likely driven by elevated inflammatory cues. 65 
 Figure 4. Divergent clonal myeloid differentiation fates in human tissues. 
 Open in a new tab 
 (A) Monocyte, macrophage, and DC proportions of largest myeloid clones (≥10 cells), split by tumor and NILT. 
 (B) Scatterplots comparing clone frequencies of circulating myeloid cells with those in tumor (top) and NILT (bottom) myeloid cells. R and p value from Spearman’s correlation. 
 (C) Scatterplots comparing clone frequencies of monocytes (left) and macrophage/DC (right) between NILT and tumor. R and p value from Spearman’s correlation. 
 (D) Distribution of the cell type fraction within each myeloid clone (≥5 cells), split by tissue site. p values are from a Wald statistic from binomial generalized linear model (GLM) with a logit link. Boxplots: center line, median; box limits, first and third quartiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. (E) Cumulative fraction of clone sizes for the indicated myeloid cell types, split by tissue site. AUC corresponds to the overall clone size for the indicated cell type and tissue site. 
 (F) Summary of AUC differences between tumor and NILT for all myeloid cell types. A positive value indicates the cell type has larger clone sizes in lung tumors compared to NILTs. Significance is determined by p values from (D) and (E). 
 (G) Heatmaps showing cell type proportions split by tumor and NILT for DC-biased (top) and MΦ-biased (bottom) clones. Clone sizes correspond to the number of myeloid cells per clone. Only clones detected in both tissue sites or clones with at least three cells are used to identify cell-type biased clones 
 (H) Distribution of cell type fraction within DC3-biased clones. 
 (I) Same as in (H) but for MoMΦ1-biased clones. 
 (J) Contour plots, representing cell density of DC3-biased clones (top row, red) and MoMΦ-biased clones (bottom row, blue), projected onto the UMAP. 
 (K) Same as (J) but highlighting tissue-derived monocytes. 
 (L) Same as (J) but highlighting MΦ/DC.(M) Schematic illustrating divergent clonal differentiation fate for myeloid cells. See also Figure S11 and Table S3 To identify the specific myeloid subtypes that monocytes preferentially differentiate into within the TME, we analyzed clone compositions by subtype ( Figures 4E , 4F , and S11D ). Both CD14 + and CD16 + monocytes were less represented in tumors compared to NILTs, while SPP1 + MoMΦ2 and DC3s were preferentially enriched in tumors. Notably, MoMΦ1 was more abundant in NILTs. If differentiation were purely driven by the tissue environment, the same clone would display different myeloid subtype compositions between tumor and NILT. To test this hypothesis, we clustered clone-level subtype compositions stratified by tissue site ( Figure 4G ). Interestingly, we observed clone-intrinsic lineage biases, with clones consistently favoring differentiation toward either DCs or macrophages, independent of tissue site. DC-biased clones were enriched for DC3s in tumors and consisted primarily of monocytes in NILTs, with minimal macrophage representation across sites ( Figure 4H ). In contrast, macrophage-biased clones exhibited distinct behaviors depending on the MoMΦ subtype: MoMΦ1-biased clones were depleted of monocytes and enriched for MoMΦ1 cells in NILTs ( Figure 4I ), whereas MoMΦ2-biased clones almost exclusively consisted of MoMΦ2 cells in tumors. These findings suggest that monocytes possess intrinsic biases in both differentiation fate and site preference. 
 We next grouped myeloid cells from DC-biased and macrophage-biased clones to compare their epigenetic profiles. Across tissue sites, cells from the two groups clustered distinctly, even within the same myeloid subtype such as CD14 + monocytes in both tissue and periphery ( Figures 4J – 4M ). Remarkably, circulating CD14 + monocytes from the two groups were epigenetically distinct even prior to tissue infiltration, with monocytes within each group more similar to one another than to those in the other group ( Figures S11E – S11H ). TF motif analysis revealed that DC-biased monocytes were enriched for proinflammatory programs (NF-κB, IRF, STAT2, and BLIMP-1), whereas macrophage-biased monocytes were enriched for immunosuppressive programs (MAF family, NRF2, and RUNX1/2) 66 – 71 ( Figure S11I ). Upon tumor infiltration, IRF and BLIMP-1 motifs remained differentially accessible in DC-biased monocytes, with ID3/ID4 additionally becoming selectively accessible, supporting their anti-tumor potential 72 ( Figure S11J ). 
 Corroborating these motif-level inferences, gene body accessibility analysis identified IRF1, IRF3 , and BLIMP-1 as differentially accessible in DC-biased monocytes and MAF (encoding c-MAF, a key driver of macrophage immunosuppressive phenotypes 73 – 75 ) in macrophage-biased monocytes, with cross-tissue patterns suggesting stage-specific roles before and after tissue infiltration ( Figures S11K and S11L ). To further support these inferences, we reanalyzed scRNA-seq data from a comprehensive atlas of myeloid cells in human lung tumors 8 , 30 and performed pseudotime inference to identify fate-biased peripheral monocytes to both the macrophage and DC3 lineages ( Figures S11M – S11P ; methods ). Differential expression analyses of peripheral CD14 + monocytes confirmed fate-based transcriptional programs, including up-regulation of C1QA, C1QB , and C1QC in macrophage-biased monocytes and FCER1A and EREG in DC3-biased monocytes 76 ( Figure S11Q ; full list in Table S3 ). Taken together, these findings suggest that circulating monocytes exhibit intrinsic epigenetic biases that predispose them to differentiate into either DCs or macrophages within the TME, contributing to their distinct functional roles in shaping the anti-tumor innate immune response. DISCUSSION 
 Here, we performed mtscATAC-seq on 218,715 cells across 23 matched tumor, non-involved tissue, and peripheral blood samples from patients with lung and ovarian cancers to generate a clonally resolved map of the human innate immune response to cancer. To ensure the accuracy of clonal tracing in solid tissues, we developed Mitotrek, a tailored analysis framework that prioritizes clonal assignment fidelity over sensitivity or resolution. Our analyses revealed that innate immune cells in tumors are primarily derived from a diverse pool of circulating precursors without evidence of tissue-specific clonal expansion, in contrast to the antigen-driven expansion of adaptive immune cells. Epigenetic and clonal analyses further revealed that DC3s, but not cDC2s, exhibit monocytic regulatory features and are clonally related to monocytes in both circulation and tissue. Although a recent study in mice showed that DC3s arise from bone marrow progenitors shared with monocytes, 77 the rarity of DC3s in peripheral blood, their abundance in tumor lesions, and the lack of clonal expansion of DC3s in our data collectively suggest that human DC3s in tumors differentiate directly from monocytes upon tissue infiltration. 
 A key finding of our work is that phenotypically diverse tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells were clonally related to distinct subsets of circulating monocytes, with clones consistently biased toward either DC or macrophage fates in both tumor and non-involved tissue. These biases were accompanied by distinct chromatin accessibility patterns detectable even in peripheral blood monocytes prior to tissue infiltration: macrophage bias was linked to AP-1 family factors, c-MAF, and NRF2, whereas DC bias was linked to IRF, STAT2, and NF-κB motifs, 78 suggestive of priming by type I interferons, TNF-α, and IL-1 signaling. 79 , 80 Consistent with this, a recent study identified a macrophage subset defined by FOSL2 (an AP-1 factor) activity and derived from circulating monocytes as strongly associated with glioma malignancy, 38 supporting our observation that AP-1-enriched monocytes are predisposed to macrophage differentiation within the TME. These findings suggest that the tumor myeloid compartment may be peripherally programmed, offering an alternative to the view that intratumoral monocyte differentiation is primarily driven by local environmental cues, and raise the possibility that tumors epigenetically pre-condition monocytes through systemic cytokine signaling 81 before tissue infiltration. 
 Limitations of this study 
 Several limitations of our study could be addressed in future work. First, our findings are based on a modest cohort of patients with lung and ovarian cancers; although we deeply profiled each patient and observed consistent patterns across patients and cancer types, validation in additional patient settings, including other tumor types, will be important to establish generalizability. Second, our approach does not capture the temporal dynamics of monocyte infiltration and differentiation. Longitudinal sampling or integration with additional progenitor populations would further establish the sequence of events that shape the tumor myeloid compartment. Lastly, our current approach excludes nuclear-derived mutations that could, in principle, contribute to resolving subclonal relationships but are poorly covered by our assay. Future technological advances may enable more reliable inference of subclonal architectures to corroborate the differentiation dynamics that we propose. RESOURCE AVAILABILITY 
 Lead contact 
 Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Ansuman T. Satpathy ( satpathy@stanford.edu ). Materials availability 
 This study did not generate new reagents. STAR★METHODS 
 EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS 
 Human samples 
 Fresh ovarian tumors, lung tumors, NILT samples, and peripheral blood were collected at the time of surgery by Stanford Tissue Procurement Shared Resource facility with the appropriate written informed consent and institutional IRB approval. Summary statistics and patient history are available in Table S1 . For the early-stage NSCLC dataset, exclusion criteria included previous systemic treatment or radiotherapy. For the ovarian cancer dataset, exclusion criteria included tumors of non-ovary or unknown origin. We note that one patient (SU-L-003) had a neuroendocrine tumor and was receiving olaparib (PARP inhibitor) at the time of surgery for concurrent tubo-ovarian carcinosarcoma, which was confirmed as an independent primary tumor by pathology studies ( Figure S1A ). METHOD DETAILS 
 Tissue processing 
 For each patient, we collected tumor resections, peripheral blood samples, and non-adjacent non-neoplastic tissue (confirmed by pathological analysis) from the same resected lobe. Because the immediately adjacent tissue often exhibits pathological alterations, we excluded these tissues from genomic profiling. All tumor and non-adjacent healthy tissues were procured following surgical resection. Samples were dissociated and viably cryopreserved for downstream library preparation and sequencing. In brief, solid tumor specimens on ice were minced to pieces of <1 mm3 and transferred to 5 mL of digestion medium containing DNase I (100 μg/mL) and collagenase P (2 mg/mL) in Advanced DMEM/F-12. Minced tissue was transferred into C-tubes for use in the gentleMACS Octo Dissociator system at 37°C at 20 rpm for 20 min. After digestion, the cell suspension was filtered through a 70-μm filter, which was washed with an additional 10 mL of DMEM/F-12. The sample was then centrifuged at 400 g at 4°C for 5 min. Any residual undigested tissue was further digested for an additional 20-min incubation with additional digestion medium. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 500 μL of ACK red blood cell lysis buffer and incubated for 1 min on ice, followed by the addition of ice-cold PBS. The cell count and viability were determined by trypan blue staining by using a Countess II FL automated cell counter, before proceeding to cell-sorting. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) 
 Cells were classified into T cells (CD45 + CD3 + ), other leukocytes (CD45 + CD3 − ), and malignant or stromal cells (CD45 − CD3 − ). The antibodies used included anti-human CD45 conjugated to V500 (clone HI30, 560779, lot 7172744, BD Biosciences) and anti-human CD3 conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (clone OKT3, 11-0037-41, lot 2007722, Invitrogen), both diluted at 1:200. Live/dead staining was performed using propidium iodide (P3566, Invitrogen) at a final concentration of 2.5 μg/mL. Cell sorting was conducted on a BD FACSAria III cell sorter (BD Biosciences). Preparation of mtscATAC-seq libraries 
 For the generation of mtscATAC-seq libraries, we adapted the 10× Genomics scATAC-seq platform NextGEM v1.1 kits. In brief, mtscATAC-seq was performed with modifications to the ‘‘Nuclei Isolation for Single Cell ATAC Sequencing’’ ( CG000169 Rev D) user guide, where we fixed and permeabilized cells to retain mitochondria and mtDNA within their host cell by removing Tween 20 as part of the lysis buffer. 19 For the library preparation we followed the ‘‘Chromium Next GEM Single Cell ATAC Reagent Kits v1.1’’ ( CG000209 Rev F), user guide with only minor modifications as described and highlighted below and otherwise refer the reader to the original and highly detailed workflow by 10× Genomics. 19 Sequencing and upstream processing of mtscATAC-seq data 
 All libraries were sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 device using a 10 × 16 × 151×151 read configuration to accommodate the 10× ATAC cell barcode in the i5 piece of the read. Libraries were sequenced to a target of 30,000–35,000 reads/cell as previously recommended. 19 Raw.bcl files were converted into per-sample.fastq files using Illumina bcl2fastq. 
 Initial processing of mtscATAC-seq data was performed using the CellRanger-ATAC Pipeline v.2.0.0 by mapping scATAC-seq reads with cellranger-atac count to the GRCh38 reference genome, hardmasked for regions that would otherwise interfere with mapping to the mitochondrial genome (as previously detailed 17 ). The outputs included fragments files for downstream epigenomics analyses and.bam files for mtDNA genotyping. 
 Mitochondrial genotyping was performed on these fragment files with mgatk in tenx mode using the barcodes identified as cells by CellRanger (i.e., cells passing ATAC filter). Only cells with at least 10× coverage of the mitochondrial genome were included in the analysis, achieving a median coverage of 30×-70× across experiments. Across all quality-controlled cells, we observed a mean percell mitochondrial genome coverage of 37.8, with a mean coverage of 39.2 among cells assigned to clones used for downstream clonal analyses. Profiling and validation of mtDNA variants via single-cell TCR 
 For one ovarian donor (SU- O -002), excess CD45 + tumor and peripheral blood mononuclear cells were available for additional profiling to corroborate mtDNA-derived clonotypes. To achieve this, single cells were partitioned into GEMs (gel bead-in-emulsions) on a Chromium Controller (10× Genomics; Single Cell 5′ kit, Cat. PN-1000695) following the manufacturer’s protocol with TCR profiling. Reverse transcription was performed in-GEM, followed by emulsion breakage, cDNA cleanup, and amplification. Separate gene-expression and TCR libraries were constructed per 10× recommendations. Library quality and size distributions were verified by TapeStation. Pooled libraries were sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 instrument for 151 × 151 R1 and R2 read lengths. Raw.fastq files were processed using CellRanger v8 default parameters for both gene expression and VDJ quantification to the hg38 reference. 
 For downstream analyses, we used mgatk to generate a per-cell, per-mutation heteroplasmy matrix. 19 Analyzing 5′ scRNA-seq data for mtDNA mutations incurs several limitations as only ∼5% of the mitochondrial genome is transcribed and well-covered by this kit 17 and the high error rate of mitochondrial transcription leads to many more spurious mutations. 16 Hence, we restricted our analyses to a subset of high-quality cells with an overall coverage of 20× at well-covered sites detected from the 5′ kit and containing valid TCRs and high-quality gene expression data (i.e., at least 1,000 UMIs and 500 distinct genes detected). For these cells, we considered TCRs with at least 3 cells and performed a supervised Mann-Whitney statistic to determine mutations enriched within a specific TCR, which is the same workflow that we previously used for Smart-seq2 data for T cells. 16 
 Figure S1D shows the 10 mutations with the highest statistic where all cells with a mutation detected and a valid TCR were plotted. As many T cells may not be individually barcoded by mtDNA and only ∼5% of the mitochondrial genome can be profiled with the 5′ kit, we specifically do not report overlap statistics but use these data to illustrate the concordance of mtDNA variation with orthogonal clonal markers. scATAC-seq QC, dimensionality reduction and clustering 
 CellRanger output fragment files were loaded and converted to Arrow files using the createArrowFiles function in ArchR. Quality control metrics were computed for each cell, and only cells with TSS enrichments greater than 4 were kept for all samples. Cells were also filtered based on the number of unique fragments sequenced using a cut-off of 1000. Doublet scores for all cells were computed using the ArchR functions addDoubletScores with k = 10, knnMethod = “LSI”, and LSIMethod = 1. 
 Sample groupings were defined based on cell types, tissue sites, and disease status (e.g., all cells, lung tumor and NILT samples from patients with NSCLC in Figure 1 ; myeloid cells, all samples from patients with NSCLC in Figure 3 ). An ArchR project was then created for each of the sample groupings and doublets were filtered with filterDoublets with a filter ratio of 1. For each ArchR project, dimensionality reduction was performed with addIterativeLSI using default parameters to embed ATAC-data in latent semantic indexing (LSI) space. Next, clustering was performed with addClusters using default parameters. Annotation of mtscATAC-seq dataset 
 An iterative clustering approach was used to annotate cells, where after each round of clustering, select clusters with relatively high epigenetic similarity (e.g., T and NK cells) are merged and reclustered to achieve desired granularity and higher clustering accuracy. For the NSCLC lung tumor/NILT data sample grouping and ovarian tumor sample grouping, clusters were annotated based on gene score of known marker genes, including EPCAM , KRT18 (epithelial and tumor cells), VWF , PECAM1 (endothelial cells), COL1A2 , FBLN1 (fibroblasts), CD3D , CD4 , FOXP3 , CD8A , KLRD1 , NCR1 (T and NK cells), MS4A1 , PAX5 (B cells), TNFRSF17 , VOPP1 (plasma cells), CD14 , LYZ (monocytes), APOC1 , CD163 (macrophages), HLA-DQA1 , ZBTB46 (DCs), CLEC4C (PDCs), TPSAB1 , KIT (mast cells). 
 9 initial clusters in the lung tumor/NILT data annotated as epithelial or tumor cells were grouped and reclustered, resulting in 22 clusters. 9 clusters were annotated as tumor for satisfying the following criteria 1) highly patient specific and 2) enriched over 4-fold in tumor compared to NILT. The other 13 clusters were annotated as lung epithelial subtypes based on high gene score of following signatures AGER , PDPN , CLIC5 (alveolar type 1), SFTPB , SFTPC , SFTPD , MUC1 , ETV5 (alveolar type 2), FOXJ1 , TUBB1 , TP73 , CCDC78 (ciliated), KRT5 , KRT17 , MIR205HG (basal), MUC5B , SCGB1A1 , BPIFB1 , PIGR , SCGB3A1 (secretory). 
 6 initial clusters in the lung tumor/NILT data annotated as T/NK cells were further divided into 19 clusters. 5 initial clusters in the ovarian tumor data annotated as T/NK cells were further divided into 13 clusters. These T/NK clusters were annotated using known marker genes, including CD3D (broad T), CD8A (CD8 + T), CD4 (CD4 + T), GNLY , NCR1 (NK/ILC), FOXP3 (Treg). To support the marker gene-based annotation, cells were projected to human PBMC reference data using the Azimuth application. 84 The Azimuth-predicted cell types were dominated by CD4 + T, CD8 + T, Treg, NK, and ILC, which are all associated with distinct clusters and consistent with the mark-gene based annotations. One cluster in the lung data is marked by the gene score pattern of CD3D +, CD8A −, CD4 − , CD56 + and high gene score of NK signature ( GNLY , PRF1 , GZMB , KLRB1 , CCL3 , KLRF1 , NCR1 ), which was defined as invariant NKT cells. 
 For the myeloid reclustering annotation, given that DCs comprised a minor fraction of myeloid cells in peripheral blood relative to lung tumors and NILTs (4.4% vs. 27.4%, respectively), we were unable to fully resolve DC subtypes in blood and thus grouped circulating DCs as a single population. Gene signature scoring 
 Gene scores for individual genes are computed as implemented in ArchR. When computing the composite gene score for a gene signature, gene scores of individual genes in the signature were Z score normalized across all cells, and each cell is then scored by taking the mean z-scaled gene scores in the gene signature. Peak calling and motif analysis 
 For the NSCLC myeloid epigenetic analysis, peak calling was performed as implemented in ArchR. Both level1 (monocyte, macrophage, DC) and level 2 (e.g., CD14 + monocyte, DC3, MoMΦ1, etc) cell type annotation was used as grouping in addReproducible-PeakSet() to identify regulatory elements associated with both broad myeloid cell types as well as subtypes. Differential peak analysis was performed using getMarkerFeatures. TF motifs enriched in peak sets are identified using peakAnnoEnrichment. Per-cell TF motif activities were calculated using chromVAR. 82 Mitochondrial genotyping and clone calling 
 By default, mgatk calls high-confidence heteroplasmic variants by selecting variants with strand correlation>0.65 and variance-mean ratio>0.01. In this study, most donors have multiple samples from different tissue sites. Given that the default mgatk filters are already conservative, a union approach to selecting high-confidence heteroplasmic variants is employed to increase sensitivity, where if a variant passes the default mgatk filters in any sample, then it is considered a valid, informative variant in all other samples from the same donor (e.g., if a variant is determined to be high quality in the lung tumor sample, it is unlikely to be spurious if it is also observed in the peripheral blood sample from the same donor). We noted one polymorphic and highly homologous region (CCCTCCC in GRCh38 chrM:307–314) that led to spurious connections under the relaxed filtering criteria and explicitly disregarded variants from this region. This mitochondrial variant processing procedure for clone calling outputs a cell by variant heteroplasmy matrix combining all samples for each donor and is implemented in the mitotrek.processing module. 
 Clones are then called for each donor using mitotrek.core.assign_cell_to_clones. Variants present in >20% cells from a donor (likely technical or homoplasmic) or less than 3 cells are removed. The heteroplasmy matrix is then binarized with a cutoff of 0.07 based on the rationale that exact heteroplasmy levels are not reliable given the stochasticity from mitochondrial genome distribution during cell division and variance in per-cell mitochondrial genome coverage. The heteroplasmy cutoff value is chosen based on benchmarking experiments using published data ( Figures 1C and 1D ). Although our filtering strategy effectively removes variants that are most likely to represent technical artifacts or broadly distributed homoplasmic mutations, it also reflects an inherent trade-off between accuracy and sensitivity. 
 To convert mitochondrial variants to clones, an undirected weighted graph is constructed in which vertices are variants and edges are defined by the Pearson correlation coefficient between two variants across cells, computed from the binarized heteroplasmy matrix. After removing edges with weights less than 0.5, each connected component in the graph was treated as a distinct clonotype. Most resulting connected components contained only one variant, whereas highly correlated variants (i.e., frequently co-occurring in cells) were grouped into one connected component. For clones defined by a single variant, any cell positive for the associated variant in the binarized heteroplasmy matrix is assigned to the clone. For clones defined by multiple variants, a cell is required to be positive for all associated variants. Finally, cells assigned to multiple clones are discarded. Benchmarking Mitotrek clone assignment 
 Full-length scRNA-seq via the Smart-seq2 technology of single-cell derived colonies from two donors published by Ludwig et al. 16 was downloaded as.fastq data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (accession GSE115214 ). Mitochondrial genotyping was performed using mgatk and cells with at least 100× mitochondrial genome coverage were retained for downstream analysis. Clones were called using mitotrek.core.assign_cell_to_clones with a binarization cutoff threshold set from 0.01 to 0.15. For each ground truth clone label (established in the experimental protocol by physical separation of the clones), the predicted clone label was determined by taking the mode of called clones among cells in the ground truth clone to compute accuracy, which is implemented in mitotrek.core.clone_calling_accuracy. Clone sharing analysis 
 We consider two mutually exclusive sets of cells A and B (e.g., two cell types). There are N clones c 1 , c 2 , ., c N containing at least one cell in A ∪ B . Note that each clone c i belongs to a set P j which contains all clones detected in donor j . We summarize the clone counts in the two groups as a N × 2 matrix X where X i ,1 and X i ,2 correspond to number of clone c i cells in A and B , respectively. The fraction of clones shared between the two groups is computed as. 
 ∑ C i X i , 1 × X i , 2 ∑ P j D j , 1 × D j , 2 where D j , 1 = ∑ C j X j , 1 and D j , 2 = ∑ C j X j , 2 for all C j ∈ P j 
 The numerator computes the number of observed cell pairs between two groups that share a clone. The denominator is a normalization factor that represents all possible cell pairs between two groups, accounting for only cell pairs within the same donor, since cross-donor cell pairs are not valid. 
 The fraction of shared clonotypes provides a more sensitive and robust measure than correlation coefficients, which can be disproportionately influenced by outliers, capturing relative clone sharing while appropriately accounting for the number of cells detected in each cell type. Comparison of clones using binomial generalized linear model with logit link 
 To account for differences in clone size when comparing clonal lineage biases, we analyzed clonal proportions using a binomial generalized linear model (GLM) with a logit link. For each clone, the number of cells of a given lineage was modeled as a binomial outcome, with the total number of cells assigned to that clone used as the binomial denominator. This framework weights clones by their size, such that larger clones contribute proportionally more information than smaller clones, while testing for differences in underlying lineage bias between conditions or groups. Unless otherwise noted, all statistical comparisons of clonal proportions reported in the manuscript are based on this binomial GLM–based inference. Corroboration via transcriptomic analyses 
 Using a subset of 45,524 cells profiled from lung tumors and non-involved tissues from Leader et al., 30 we defined the major differentiation trajectories for CD14 + monocytes to DC3s or monocyte-derived macrophages using Slingshot 83 ( Figures S11M – S11O ). From this embedding, we could characterize 1,708 DC3-biased and 1,854 macrophage-biased cells that were annotated as CD14 + monocytes from the periphery (defined as a 2-fold biased pseudotime for either lineage; Figure S11P ). Differential expression analyses between these putative fate-biased monocytes were performed using the FindMarkers function in Seurat with default parameters. These tran- scriptomic analyses add further support to the clonal relationships that we described using mtscATAC-seq, where monocytes adopt a fate-biased epigenomic program, including in the periphery, and the cell state changes can be verified via transcriptional changes. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 Statistical analysis of single-cell sequencing data was performed in python (v3.9.4) and R (v4.3.5). Statistical analysis of flow cytometry data was performed in GraphPad Prism (v9.0). Supplementary Material 
 Supplemental Information 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Supplemental_Information.pdf (9.2MB, pdf) 
 Table S1 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S1.xlsx (11.3KB, xlsx) 
 Table S2 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S2.xlsx (15.2MB, xlsx) 
 Table S3 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S3.xlsx (631KB, xlsx) 
 Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2026.05.006 . KEY RESOURCES TABLE 
 REAGENT or RESOURCE 
 SOURCE 
 IDENTIFIER 
 Antibodies 
 Anti-human CD45 V500 (clone HI30) 
 BD Biosciences 
 Cat# 560779; RRID: AB_1937324; Lot 7172744 
 Anti-human CD3 FITC (clone OKT3) 
 Invitrogen 
 Cat# 11-0037-41; RRID: AB_2533240; Lot 2007722 
 Biological samples 
 Fresh human lung tumor and NILT 
 Stanford Tissue Procurement Shared Resource 
 N/A 
 Fresh human ovarian tumor 
 Stanford Tissue Procurement Shared Resource 
 N/A 
 Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) 
 This paper 
 N/A 
 Critical commercial assays 
 Chromium Next GEM Single Cell ATAC Reagent Kits v1.1 
 10× Genomics 
 Cat# PN-1000209 
 Chromium Single Cell 5′ kit 
 10× Genomics 
 Cat# PN-1000695 
 Nuclei Isolation for Single Cell ATAC Sequencing 
 10× Genomics 
 CG000169 
 Deposited data 
 Raw and processed mtscATAC-seq and mtDNA mutation calls 
 This paper 
 GEO: GSE302113 
 Software and algorithms 
 Mitotrek 
 This paper 
 https://github.com/vincent6liu/mitotrek 
 mgatk 
 Lareau et al. 17 
 https://github.com/caleblareau/mgatk 
 ArchR 
 Granja et al. 45 
 https://github.com/GreenleafLab/ArchR 
 CellRanger-ATAC Pipeline v.2.0.0 
 10× Genomics 
 https://support.10xgenomics.com 
 chromVAR 
 Schep et al. 82 
 https://github.com/GreenleafLab/chromVAR 
 Slingshot 
 Street et al. 83 
 https://github.com/kstreet13/slingshot 
 Seurat 
 Hao et al. 84 
 https://satijalab.org/seurat/ 
 Azimuth 
 Hao et al. 84 
 https://azimuth.hubmapconsortium.org/ 
 Open in a new tab Highlights. 
 mtDNA lineage tracing enables clonal analysis of innate immune cells in tumors 
 Tumor myeloid cells are clonally linked to circulating monocyte precursors 
 DC3s derive from monocytes and retain monocytic epigenetic features 
 Monocyte fate bias is epigenetically programmed before tumor infiltration 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 We acknowledge the patients who volunteered to participate in these studies. We thank the members of the Satpathy Lab, L. Lanier, and Y. Lavin for stimulating discussions. A.T.S. was supported by a Career Award for Medical Scientists from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, a Lloyd J. Old STAR Award from the Cancer Research Institute, an Emerging Leader Award from the Mark Foundation for Cancer Research, and the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. A.T.S. is a Weill Cancer Hub West Investigator. This work was supported by NIH grants P30CA008748 (C.A.L.), R37CA303960 (B.E.H. and C.A.L.), R00HG012579 (C.A.L.), U01AT012984 (C.A.L.), and UM1HG012076 (A.T.S. and L.S.L.). S.M.S. is supported by a Ruth L. Kirschstein Predoctoral Individual National Research Service Award (F31AR083275) and a recipient of the NIH Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) through Rockefeller University. L.S.L. is supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG), including via the Emmy Noether fellowship (LU 2336/2-1) and Heisenberg Programme (LU 2336/10-1). C.A.L. and A.T.S. are supported by the Michelson Medical Research Foundation. This work was supported by the Department of Pathology at Stanford University. 
 DECLARATION OF INTERESTS 
 V.L. has received consulting fees from Genesis Therapeutics and Cartography Biosciences. B.H. has received research support from Cartography Biosciences, Santa Ana Bio, Link Cell Sciences, and Immunogen, and has received consulting fees from Roche, Leica, Tempus, and Abbvie. C.A.L is a consultant to Cartography Biosciences. A.T.S. is a founder of Immunai, Cartography Biosciences, Santa Ana Bio, and Arpelos Biosciences, an advisor to Wing Venture Capital and 10x Genomics, and receives research funding from Astellas. Data and code availability 
 The ArchR analysis software for epigenetic analysis of scATAC-seq data is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/GreenleafLab/ArchR ). The mgatk software for processing sequencing data for single-cell mitochondrial variant calling is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/caleblareau/mgatk ). The Mi- totrek software developed in this work for clone calling using single-cell mitochondrial variant data is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/vincent6liu/mitotrek ). Raw sequencing and processed chromatin accessibility and mtDNA mutation calls are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus accession GSE302113 . Any additional custom code used for computational data processing and analysis is available from the authors upon request. REFERENCES 
 1. Pai JA, and Satpathy AT (2021). High-throughput and single-cell T cell receptor sequencing technologies. Nat. Methods
18, 881–892.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 2. Bradley P, and Thomas PG (2019). Using T cell receptor repertoires to understand the principles of adaptive immune recognition. Annu. Rev. Immunol
37, 547–570.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 3. Yost KE, Satpathy AT, Wells DK, Qi Y, Wang C, Kageyama R, McNamara KL, Granja JM, Sarin KY, Brown RA, et al. (2019). Clonal replacement of tumor-specific T cells following PD-1 blockade. Nat. Med
25, 1251–1259.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 4. Wu TD, Madireddi S, de Almeida PE, Banchereau R, Chen Y-JJ, Chitre AS, Chiang EY, Iftikhar H, O’Gorman WE, Au-Yeung A, et al. (2020). Peripheral T cell expansion predicts tumour infiltration and clinical response. Nature
579, 274–278.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 5. Pai JA, Hellmann MD, Sauter JL, Mattar M, Rizvi H, Woo HJ, Shah N, Nguyen EM, Uddin FZ, Quintanal-Villalonga A, et al. (2023). Lineage tracing reveals clonal progenitors and long-term persistence of tumor-specific T cells during immune checkpoint blockade. Cancer Cell
41, 776–790.e7.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 6. Cassetta L, and Pollard JW (2018). Targeting macrophages: therapeutic approaches in cancer. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov
17, 887–904.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 7. van Vlerken-Ysla L, Tyurina YY, Kagan VE, and Gabrilovich DI (2023). Functional states of myeloid cells in cancer. Cancer Cell
41, 490–504.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 8. Lavin Y, Kobayashi S, Leader A, Amir E-AD, Elefant N, Bigenwald C, Remark R, Sweeney R, Becker CD, Levine JH, et al. (2017). Innate Immune Landscape in Early Lung Adenocarcinoma by Paired Single-Cell Analyses. Cell
169, 750–765.e17.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 9. Zhang Q, He Y, Luo N, Patel SJ, Han Y, Gao R, Modak M, Carotta S, Haslinger C, Kind D, et al. (2019). Landscape and dynamics of single immune cells in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cell
179, 829–845.e20.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 10. Steele NG, Carpenter ES, Kemp SB, Sirihorachai VR, The S, Delrosario L, Lazarus J, Amir E-AD, Gunchick V, Espinoza C, et al. (2020). Multimodal mapping of the tumor and peripheral blood immune landscape in human pancreatic cancer. Nat. Cancer
1, 1097–1112.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 11. Krishna C, DiNatale RG, Kuo F, Srivastava RM, Vuong L, Chowell D, Gupta S, Vanderbilt C, Purohit TA, Liu M, et al. (2021). Single-cell sequencing links multiregional immune landscapes and tissue-resident T cells in ccRCC to tumor topology and therapy efficacy. Cancer Cell
39, 662–677.e6.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 12. Casanova-Acebes M, Dalla E, Leader AM, LeBerichel J, Nikolic J, Morales BM, Brown M, Chang C, Troncoso L, Chen ST, et al. (2021). Tissue-resident macrophages provide a pro-tumorigenic niche to early NSCLC cells. Nature
595, 578–584.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 13. Nalio Ramos R, Missolo-Koussou Y, Gerber-Ferder Y, Bromley CP, Bugatti M, Núñez NG, Tosello Boari J, Richer W, Menger L, Denizeau J, et al. (2022). Tissue-resident FOLR2+ macrophages associate with CD8+ T cell infiltration in human breast cancer. Cell
185, 1189–1207.e25.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 14. Larsson N-G (2010). Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in mammalian aging. Annu. Rev. Biochem
79, 683–706.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 15. Stewart JB, and Chinnery PF (2015). The dynamics of mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy: implications for human health and disease. Nat. Rev. Genet
16, 530–542.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 16. Ludwig LS, Lareau CA, Ulirsch JC, Christian E, Muus C, Li LH, Pelka K, Ge W, Oren Y, Brack A, et al. (2019). Lineage Tracing in Humans Enabled by Mitochondrial Mutations and Single-Cell Genomics. Cell
176, 1325–1339.e22.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 17. Lareau CA, Ludwig LS, Muus C, Gohil SH, Zhao T, Chiang Z, Pelka K, Verboon JM, Luo W, Christian E, et al. (2021). Massively parallel single-cell mitochondrial DNA genotyping and chromatin profiling. Nat. Biotechnol
39, 451–461.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 18. Weng C, Yu F, Yang D, Poeschla M, Liggett LA, Jones MG, Qiu X, Wahlster L, Caulier A, Hussmann JA, et al. (2024). Deciphering Cell States and Genealogies of Human Hematopoiesis. Nature
627, 389–398.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 19. Lareau CA, Liu V, Muus C, Praktiknjo SD, Nitsch L, Kautz P, Sandor K, Yin Y, Gutierrez JC, Pelka K, et al. (2023). Mitochondrial single-cell ATAC-seq for high-throughput multi-omic detection of mitochondrial genotypes and chromatin accessibility. Nat. Protoc
18, 1416–1440.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 20. Jardim DL, Goodman A, de Melo Gagliato D, and Kurzrock R (2021). The challenges of tumor mutational burden as an immunotherapy biomarker. Cancer Cell
39, 154–173.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 21. Kahn BM, Lucas A, Alur RG, Wengyn MD, Schwartz GW, Li J, Sun K, Maurer HC, Olive KP, Faryabi RB, and Stanger BZ (2021). The vascular landscape of human cancer. J. Clin. Investig
131, e136655. 10.1172/JCI136655.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 22. Ghoneum A, Afify H, Salih Z, Kelly M, and Said N (2018). Role of tumor microenvironment in ovarian cancer pathobiology. Oncotarget
9, 22832–22849.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 23. An J, Nam CH, Kim R, Lee Y, Won H, Park S, Lee WH, Park H, Yoon CJ, An Y, et al. (2024). Mitochondrial DNA mosaicism in normal human somatic cells. Nat. Genet
56, 1665–1677.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 24. De Rop FV, Hulselmans G, Flerin C, Soler-Vila P, Rafels A, Christiaens V, González-Blas CB, Marchese D, Caratû G, Poovathingal S, et al. (2024). Systematic benchmarking of single-cell ATAC-sequencing protocols. Nat. Biotechnol
42, 916–926.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 25. Borcherding N, and Brestoff JR (2023). The power and potential of mitochondria transfer. Nature
623, 283–291.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 26. Rü ckert T, Lareau CA, Mashreghi M-F, Ludwig LS, and Romagnani C (2022). Clonal expansion and epigenetic inheritance of long-lasting NK cell memory. Nat. Immunol
23, 1551–1563.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 27. Miller TE, Lareau CA, Verga JA, DePasquale EAK, Liu V, Ssozi D, Sandor K, Yin Y, Ludwig LS, El Farran CA, et al. (2022). Mitochondrial variant enrichment from high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing resolves clonal populations. Nat. Biotechnol
40, 1030–1034.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 28. Jenuth JP, Peterson AC, Fu K, and Shoubridge EA (1996). Random genetic drift in the female germline explains the rapid segregation of mammalian mitochondrial DNA. Nat. Genet
14, 146–151.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 29. Wu F, Fan J, He Y, Xiong A, Yu J, Li Y, Zhang Y, Zhao W, Zhou F, Li W, et al. (2021). Single-cell profiling of tumor heterogeneity and the microenvironment in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Nat. Commun
12, 2540.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 30. Leader AM, Grout JA, Maier BB, Nabet BY, Park MD, Tabachnikova A, Chang C, Walker L, Lansky A, Le Berichel J, et al. (2021). Single-cell analysis of human non-small cell lung cancer lesions refines tumor classification and patient stratification. Cancer Cell
39, 1594–1609.e12.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 31. Wang X, Wang K, Zhang W, Tang Z, Zhang H, Cheng Y, Zhou D, Zhang C, Zhong W-Z, Ma Q, et al. (2025). Clonal expansion dictates the efficacy of mitochondrial lineage tracing in single cells. Genome Biol. 26, 70.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 32. Sun JC, Beilke JN, and Lanier LL (2009). Adaptive immune features of natural killer cells. Nature
457, 557–561.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 33. Hammer Q, Rü ckert T, Borst EM, Dunst J, Haubner A, Durek P, Heinrich F, Gasparoni G, Babic M, Tomic A, et al. (2018). Peptidespecific recognition of human cytomegalovirus strains controls adaptive natural killer cells. Nat. Immunol
19, 453–463.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 34. Bé ziat V, Liu LL, Malmberg J-A, Ivarsson MA, Sohlberg E, Bjö rklund A, Retiè re C, Sverremark-Ekströ m E, Traherne J, Ljungman P, et al. (2013). NK cell responses to cytomegalovirus infection lead to stable imprints in the human KIR repertoire and involve activating KIRs. Blood
121, 2678–2688.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 35. Strauss-Albee DM, Fukuyama J, Liang EC, Yao Y, Jarrell JA, Drake AL, Kinuthia J, Montgomery RR, John-Stewart G, Holmes S, and Blish CA (2015). Human NK cell repertoire diversity reflects immune experience and correlates with viral susceptibility. Sci. Transl. Med
7, 297ra115. 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac5722. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 36. MacLean AJ, Bonifacio JPPL, Oram SL, Mohsen MO, Bachmann MF, and Arnon TI (2024). Regulation of pulmonary plasma cell responses during secondary infection with influenza virus. J. Exp. Med. 221, e20232014. 10.1084/jem.20232014.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 37. Park MD, Reyes-Torres I, LeBerichel J, Hamon P, LaMarche NM, Hegde S, Belabed M, Troncoso L, Grout JA, Magen A, et al. (2023). TREM2 macrophages drive NK cell paucity and dysfunction in lung cancer. Nat. Immunol. 24, 792–801.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 38. Yu KKH, Abou-Mrad Z, Törkenczy K., Schulze I., Gantchev J., Baquer G., Hopland K., Bander ED., Tosi U., Brennan C., et al. (2026). Characterization of a pathogenic subpopulation of human glioma associated macrophages linked to glioma progression. Cancer Cell
44, 129–145.e12.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 39. Villani A-C, Satija R, Reynolds G, Sarkizova S, Shekhar K, Fletcher J, Griesbeck M, Butler A, Zheng S, Lazo S, et al. (2017). Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science
356, eaah4573. 10.1126/science.aah4573.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 40. Bourdely P, Anselmi G, Vaivode K, Ramos RN, Missolo-Koussou Y, Hidalgo S, Tosselo J, Nuñez N, Richer W, Vincent-Salomon A., et al. (2020). Transcriptional and Functional Analysis of CD1c+ Human Dendritic Cells Identifies a CD163+ Subset Priming CD8+CD103+
T Cells. Immunity
53, 335–352.e8.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 41. Brown CC, Gudjonson H, Pritykin Y, Deep D, Lavallée V-P, Mendoza A, Fromme R, Mazutis L, Ariyan C, Leslie C., et al. (2019). Transcriptional basis of mouse and human dendritic cell heterogeneity. Cell
179, 846–863.e24.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 42. Dutertre C-A, Becht E, Irac SE, Khalilnezhad A, Narang V, Khalilnezhad S, Ng PY, van den Hoogen LL, Leong JY, Lee B, et al. (2019). Single-cell analysis of human mononuclear phagocytes reveals subset-defining markers and identifies circulating inflammatory dendritic cells. Immunity
51, 573–589.e8.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 43. Maier B, Leader AM, Chen ST, Tung N, Chang C, LeBerichel J, Chudnovskiy A, Maskey S, Walker L, Finnigan JP, et al. (2020). A conserved dendritic-cell regulatory program limits antitumour immunity. Nature
580, 257–262.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 44. Zilionis R, Engblom C, Pfirschke C, Savova V, Zemmour D, Saatcioglu HD, Krishnan I, Maroni G, Meyerovitz CV, Kerwin CM, et al. (2019). Single-cell transcriptomics of human and mouse lung cancers reveals conserved myeloid populations across individuals and species. Immunity
50, 1317–1334.e10.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 45. Granja JM, Corces MR, Pierce SE, Bagdatli ST, Choudhry H, Chang HY, and Greenleaf WJ (2021). ArchR is a scalable software package for integrative single-cell chromatin accessibility analysis. Nat. Genet. 53, 403–411.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 46. Zhang DE, Zhang P, Wang ND, Hetherington CJ, Darlington GJ, and Tenen DG (1997). Absence of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor signaling and neutrophil development in CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha-deficient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
94, 569–574.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 47. Kim S, Chen J, Ou F, Liu T-T, Jo S, Gillanders WE, Murphy TL, and Murphy KM (2024). Transcription factor C/EBPα is required for the development of Ly6C hi monocytes but not Ly6C lo monocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
121, e2315659121. 10.1073/pnas.2315659121.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 48. Alder JK, Georgantas RW, Hildreth RL, Kaplan IM, Morisot S, Yu X, McDevitt M, and Civin CI (2008). Kruppel-like factor 4 is essential for inflammatory monocyte differentiation in vivo. J. Immunol. 180, 5645–5652.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 49. Feinberg MW, Wara AK, Cao Z, Lebedeva MA, Rosenbauer F, Iwasaki H, Hirai H, Katz JP, Haspel RL, Gray S, et al. (2007). The Kruppel-like factor KLF4 is a critical regulator of monocyte differentiation. EMBO J. 26, 4138–4148.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 50. Tussiwand R, Everts B, Grajales-Reyes GE, Kretzer NM, Iwata A, Bagaitkar J, Wu X, Wong R, Anderson DA, Murphy TL, et al. (2015). Klf4 expression in conventional dendritic cells is required for T helper 2 cell responses. Immunity
42, 916–928.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 51. Carter JH, and Tourtellotte WG (2007). Early growth response transcriptional regulators are dispensable for macrophage differentiation. J. Immunol. 178, 3038–3047.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 52. Kirschenbaum D, Xie K, Ingelfinger F, Katzenelenbogen Y, Abadie K, Look T, Sheban F, Phan TS, Li B, Zwicky P, et al. (2024). Time-resolved single-cell transcriptomics defines immune trajectories in glioblastoma. Cell
187, 149–165.e23.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 53. Devalaraja S, To TKJ, Folkert IW, Natesan R, Alam MZ, Li M, Tada Y, Budagyan K, Dang MT, Zhai L, et al. (2020). Tumor-derived retinoic acid regulates intratumoral monocyte differentiation to promote immune suppression. Cell
180, 1098–1114.e16.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 54. Sharma SM, Bronisz A, Hu R, Patel K, Mansky KC, Sif S, and Ostrowski MC (2007). MITF and PU.1 recruit p38 MAPK and NFATc1 to target genes during osteoclast differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 15921–15929.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 55. Liao X, Sharma N, Kapadia F, Zhou G, Lu Y, Hong H, Paruchuri K, Mahabeleshwar GH, Dalmas E, Venteclef N, et al. (2011). Krüppel-like factor 4 regulates macrophage polarization. J. Clin. Investig. 121, 2736–2749.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 56. A-González N., and Castrillo A. (2011). Liver X receptors as regulators of macrophage inflammatory and metabolic pathways. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1812, 982–994.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 57. Goudot C, Coillard A, Villani A-C, Gueguen P, Cros A, Sarkizova S, Tang-Huau T-L, Bohec M, Baulande S, Hacohen N, et al. (2017). Aryl hydrocarbon receptor controls monocyte differentiation into dendritic cells versus macrophages. Immunity
47, 582–596.e6.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 58. Trizzino M, Zucco A, Deliard S, Wang F, Barbieri E, Veglia F, Gabrilovich D, and Gardini A (2021). EGR1 is a gatekeeper of inflammatory enhancers in human macrophages. Sci. Adv. 7, eaaz8836. 10.1126/sciadv.aaz8836.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 59. Moore KJ, Rosen ED, Fitzgerald ML, Randow F, Andersson LP, Altshuler D, Milstone DS, Mortensen RM, Spiegelman BM, and Freeman MW (2001). The role of PPAR-gamma in macrophage differentiation and cholesterol uptake. Nat. Med. 7, 41–47.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 60. Lavin Y, Winter D, Blecher-Gonen R, David E, Keren-Shaul H, Merad M, Jung S, and Amit I (2014). Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment. Cell
159, 1312–1326.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 61. Murphy TL, Grajales-Reyes GE, Wu X, Tussiwand R, Briseño CG, Iwata A, Kretzer NM, Durai V, and Murphy KM. (2016). Transcriptional control of dendritic cell development. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 34, 93–119.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 62. Satpathy AT, Briseño CG, Cai X, Michael DG, Chou C, Hsiung S, Bhattacharya D, Speck NA, and Egawa T (2014). Runx1 and Cbfβ regulate the development of Flt3+ dendritic cell progenitors and restrict myeloproliferative disorder. Blood
123, 2968–2977.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 63. Villar J, Cros A, De Juan A, Alaoui L, Bonte P-E, Lau CM, Tiniakou I, Reizis B, and Segura E (2023). ETV3 and ETV6 enable monocyte differentiation into dendritic cells by repressing macrophage fate commitment. Nat. Immunol. 24, 84–95.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 64. Guilliams M, Mildner A, and Yona S (2018). Developmental and functional heterogeneity of monocytes. Immunity
49, 595–613.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 65. Jakubzick CV, Randolph GJ, and Henson PM (2017). Monocyte differentiation and antigen-presenting functions. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 17, 349–362.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 66. Kusiak A, and Brady G (2022). Bifurcation of signalling in human innate immune pathways to NF-kB and IRF family activation. Biochem. Pharmacol. 205, 115246.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 67. Kim SJ (2015). Immunological function of Blimp-1 in dendritic cells and relevance to autoimmune diseases. Immunol. Res. 63, 113–120.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 68. Kobayashi EH, Suzuki T, Funayama R, Nagashima T, Hayashi M, Sekine H, Tanaka N, Moriguchi T, Motohashi H, Nakayama K, and Yamamoto M (2016). Nrf2 suppresses macrophage inflammatory response by blocking proinflammatory cytokine transcription. Nat. Commun. 7, 11624.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 69. Bellissimo DC, Chen C-H, Zhu Q, Bagga S, Lee C-T, He B, Wertheim GB, Jordan M, Tan K, Worthen GS, et al. (2020). Runx1 negatively regulates inflammatory cytokine production by neutrophils in response to Toll-like receptor signaling. Blood Adv. 4, 1145–1158.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 70. Tomimatsu M, Matsumoto K, Ashizuka M, Kumagai S, Tanaka S, Nakae T, Yokota K, Kominami S, Kajiura R, Okuzaki D, et al. (2022). Myeloid cell-specific ablation of Runx2 gene exacerbates postinfarct cardiac remodeling. Sci. Rep. 12, 16656.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 71. Zezulin AU, Yen D, Ye D, Howell ED, Bresciani E, Diemer J, Ren J-G, Ahmad MH, Castilla LH, Touw IP, et al. (2023). RUNX1 is required in granulocyte-monocyte progenitors to attenuate inflammatory cytokine production by neutrophils. Genes Dev. 37, 605–620.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 72. Deng Z, Loyher P-L, Lazarov T, Li L, Shen Z, Bhinder B, Yang H, Zhong Y, Alberdi A, Massague J, et al. (2024). The nuclear factor ID3 endows macrophages with a potent anti-tumour activity. Nature
626, 864–873.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 73. Cao S, Liu J, Song L, and Ma X (2005). The protooncogene c-Maf is an essential transcription factor for 
IL-10 gene expression in macrophages. J. Immunol. 174, 3484–3492.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 74. Liu M, Tong Z, Ding C, Luo F, Wu S, Wu C, Albeituni S, He L, Hu X, Tieri D, et al. (2020). Transcription factor c-Maf is a checkpoint that programs macrophages in lung cancer. J. Clin. Investig. 130, 2081–2096.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 75. Cao S, Liu J, Chesi M, Bergsagel PL, Ho I-C, Donnelly RP, and Ma X (2002). Differential regulation of IL-12 and IL-10 gene expression in macrophages by the basic leucine zipper transcription factor c-Maf fibrosarcoma. J. Immunol. 169, 5715–5725.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 76. Odell ID, Steach H, Gauld SB, Reinke-Breen L, Karman J, Carr TL, Wetter JB, Phillips L, Hinchcliff M, and Flavell RA (2022). Epiregulin is a dendritic cell-derived EGFR ligand that maintains skin and lung fibrosis. Sci. Immunol. 7, eabq6691.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 77. Liu Z, Wang H, Li Z, Dress RJ, Zhu Y, Zhang S, De Feo D, Kong WT, Cai P, Shin A, et al. (2023). Dendritic cell type 3 arises from Ly6C+ monocyte-dendritic cell progenitors. Immunity
56, 1761–1777.e6.
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 78. Shih VF-S, Davis-Turak J, Macal M, Huang JQ, Ponomarenko J, Kearns JD, Yu T, Fagerlund R, Asagiri M, Zuniga EI, and Hoffmann A (2012). Control of RelB during dendritic cell activation integrates canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways. Nat. Immunol. 13, 1162–1170.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 79. Park SH, Kang K, Giannopoulou E, Qiao Y, Kang K, Kim G, ParkMin K-H, and Ivashkiv LB (2017). Type I interferons and the cytokine TNF cooperatively reprogram the macrophage epigenome to promote inflammatory activation. Nat. Immunol. 18, 1104–1116.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 80. Sheu KM, and Hoffmann A (2022). Functional hallmarks of healthy macrophage responses: Their regulatory basis and disease relevance. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 40, 295–321.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 81. Hiam-Galvez KJ, Allen BM, and Spitzer MH (2021). Systemic immunity in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer
21, 345–359.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 82. Schep AN, Wu B, Buenrostro JD, and Greenleaf WJ (2017). chromVAR: inferring transcription-factor-associated accessibility from single-cell epigenomic data. Nat. Methods
14, 975–978.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 83. Street K, Risso D, Fletcher RB, Das D, Ngai J, Yosef N, Purdom E, and Dudoit S (2018). Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference for single-cell transcriptomics. BMC Genom. 19, 477. [ Google Scholar ] 
 84. Hao Y, Stuart T, Kowalski MH, Choudhary S, Hoffman P, Hartman A, Srivastava A, Molla G, Madad S, Fernandez-Granda C, and Satija R (2024). Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell analysis. Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 293–304.
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Associated Data 
 This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
 Supplementary Materials 
 Supplemental Information 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Supplemental_Information.pdf (9.2MB, pdf) 
 Table S1 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S1.xlsx (11.3KB, xlsx) 
 Table S2 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S2.xlsx (15.2MB, xlsx) 
 Table S3 
 NIHMS2184724-supplement-Table_S3.xlsx (631KB, xlsx) 
 Data Availability Statement 
 The ArchR analysis software for epigenetic analysis of scATAC-seq data is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/GreenleafLab/ArchR ). The mgatk software for processing sequencing data for single-cell mitochondrial variant calling is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/caleblareau/mgatk ). The Mi- totrek software developed in this work for clone calling using single-cell mitochondrial variant data is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/vincent6liu/mitotrek ). Raw sequencing and processed chromatin accessibility and mtDNA mutation calls are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus accession GSE302113 . Any additional custom code used for computational data processing and analysis is available from the authors upon request. 
 ACTIONS 
 View on publisher site 
 PDF (2.8 MB) 
 Cite 
 Collections 
 Permalink 
 PERMALINK 
 Copy 
 RESOURCES 
 Similar articles
 Cited by other articles
 Links to NCBI Databases
 Cite 
 Copy 
 Download .nbib 
 .nbib 
 Format: 
 AMA
 APA
 MLA
 NLM
 Add to Collections 
 Create a new collection 
 Add to an existing collection 
 Name your collection
 * 
 Choose a collection
 Unable to load your collection due to an error 
 Please try again 
 Add
 Cancel
 Follow NCBI
 NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
 NCBI on Facebook 
 NCBI on LinkedIn 
 NCBI on GitHub 
 NCBI RSS feed 
 Connect with NLM
 NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
 NLM on Facebook 
 NLM on YouTube 
 National Library of Medicine
 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 
 Web Policies
 FOIA
 HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
 Help
 Accessibility
 Careers
 NLM
 NIH
 HHS
 USA.gov
 Back to Top 
