# status=PREPRINT_FULLTEXT doi=10.1101/2025.08.26.672316 (v1, bioRxiv JATS)

biorxiv BIORXIV bioRxiv bioRxiv 2692-8205 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 10.1101/2025.08.26.672316 biorxiv;2025.08.26.672316v1 biorxiv;2025.08.26.672316 2025.08.26.672316 2025.08.26.672316 2025.08.26.672316 1.1 Regular Article New Results Immunology 

## Integrated single cell analysis identifies CD39 + tumor-associated NK cells with cytotoxic potential in lung cancer
 * Corresponding author; email: alfred.zippelius@usb.ch † These authors contributed equally to this work
 ‡ Senior authors, these authors contributed equally to this work
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2236-7300 Serger Clara Rebuffet Lucas Sandholzer Michael T. Fusi Irene Oelgarth Nicole Tundo Sofia Luu Thuy T. Hojski Aljaz Lardinois Didier Trefny Marcel P. Kirchhammer Nicole Natoli Marina Matter Matthias S. Schaeuble Karin Vivier Eric Romagnani Andrea http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1933-8178 Zippelius Alfred 1 Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital and University of Basel; Basel , Switzerland 2 Aix Marseille Université , CNRS, INSERM, Centre d’Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy; Marseille , France 3 Roche Pharma Research & Early Development pRED, Roche Innovation Center; Basel , Switzerland 4 Department of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Basel; Basel , Switzerland 5 Institute of Pathology, University Hospital and University of Basel; Basel , Switzerland 6 Innate Pharma Research Laboratories , Innate Pharma; Marseille, France 7 APHM, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille-Immunopôle Profiling Platform ; Marseille, France 8 Paris-Saclay Cancer Cluster, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre , France 9 Université Paris-Saclay, Gustave Roussy, INSERM , Prédicteurs moléculaires et nouvelles cibles en oncologie; Villejuif, France 10 Medical Oncology, University Hospital Basel ; Basel, Switzerland 2025 
 30 8 2025 
 
 30 8 2025 
 
 30 8 2025 
 
 30 8 2025 
 2025.08.26.672316 
 26 8 2025 
 26 8 2025 
 30 8 2025 
 © 2025, Posted by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 2025 This pre-print is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International), CC BY-NC-ND 4.0, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

## ABSTRACT
 Despite growing interest in NK cell-targeting immunotherapies for cancer treatment, the transcriptional and functional dynamics of tumor-infiltrating NK cells remain poorly understood. Using matched single-nucleus RNA and ATAC sequencing (snRNA-seq, snATAC-seq), we resolved the heterogeneity of intratumoral NK cells in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We identified two tumor-associated NK (taNK) cell subsets, marked by ITGAE (CD103) and ITGA1 (CD49a), exhibiting features of circulating NK3 cells and hallmarks of tissue residency, dysfunction, and adaptive NK cells. Subsequent trajectory and regulon analyses revealed that inflammatory signals drive the differentiation of early GZMK ⁺ NK3 towards an ENTPD1 + (CD39⁺) effector state, characterized by activation of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Functional profiling demonstrated that CD39⁺ taNK cells retain cytotoxic potential which increases upon cytokine stimulation and NKG2A blockade. This study offers mechanistic insights into NK cell differentiation and dysfunction in NSCLC and establishes CD39⁺ taNK cells as a targetable effector population for immunotherapy.

## One sentence summary
 Single-cell multiomics revealed CD39⁺ tumor-associated NK cells in NSCLC with retained effector capacity and immunotherapy potential.

 Swiss Cancer League https://ror.org/01pd7my79 KFS-6233-08-2024 special-property contains-inline-supplementary-material 

## Competing Interest Statement
 AR reports personal fees from Hoffmann-La Roche during the conduct of the study and personal fees from Hoffmann-La Roche outside the submitted work. AZ received consulting/advisor fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Hoffmann-La Roche, NBE Therapeutics, Engimmune, and maintains further non-commercial research agreements with Hoffmann-La Roche, T3 Pharma, Bright Peak Therapeutics, AstraZeneca. EV's laboratory at the CIML is funded by the Institut National du Cancer (PLBIO23-061 to E.N-M.), the Canceropole PACA (Emergence Grant 2022 to E.N-M.), the European Research Council (ERC) under Horizon of the European Union (Treatlivmets, grant agreement nr. 101118936), MSDAvenir, Innate Pharma and institutional grants to the CIML (INSERM, CNRS and Aix-Marseille University). EV holds the Chair of Natural Killer Cells at the Fondation Gustave Roussy. MSM has served as a consultant for ThermoFisher, Merck, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen-Cilag, Hoffmann-La Roche, and Novartis; received speaker's honorary from Incyte Biosciences, Merini Group and Astellas, and maintains non-commercial research agreements with AstraZeneca.

## INTRODUCTION
 Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, with NSCLC accounting for approximately 85% of cases ( ). Although T cell-based immunotherapies have improved survival rates in NSCLC, durable responses are limited to a subset of patients, emphasizing the need for improved therapeutic approaches ( ).
 Besides T cells, NK cells have gained attention as promising immunotherapeutic target. Their intratumoral abundance has been linked to improved overall survival in various cancer types ( – ) and is predictive of response to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in NSCLC ( , ). These findings have driven the development of numerous NK cell-directed therapies, many of which are currently being evaluated in clinical trials( ). Notably, NK cells represent a promising target in tumors that have developed resistance to T cell-directed approaches through loss of MHC class I expression. However, the therapeutic efficacy of NK cell-based interventions in solid tumors has been limited by multiple challenges, including NK cell dysfunction, poor tumor homing, and immunosuppressive factors such as TGF-β, adenosine, and regulatory T cells ( ). A deeper understanding of intratumoral NK cells and their dynamic transcriptional reprogramming within the tumor microenvironment (TME) is essential to address these limitations and advance the development of more effective NK cell-targeting approaches.
 In the peripheral blood, human NK cells can be categorized into three main subsets: NK1, NK2, and NK3 ( ). NK1 cells (CD56 dim CD16 + ) exhibit high cytotoxic potential, whereas NK2 cells (CD56 bright CD16 − ) are primarily involved in immunoregulatory functions through cytokine secretion ( ). NK3 cells, distinguished by high levels of NKG2C and CD57, reflect a mature phenotype, resembling NKG2C + memory NK cells observed following HCMV infection ( , ). In contrast to circulating subsets, tissue-resident NK cells exhibit unique transcriptional and functional profiles that vary across different organs, shaped by their local microenvironment. These cells are typically less mature and share similarities with CD56 bright NK cells ( ). Overall, NK cells are heterogenous, and their differentiation, activation state, and functional capacity are shaped by their localization and the surrounding microenvironment.
 NK cells in solid tumors often acquire a dysfunctional phenotype, characterized by increased expression of inhibitory receptors, coupled with downregulation of activating receptors, compromising their tumor-killing capacity ( – ). Recent studies in human lung tumors have identified NK cells expressing markers associated with tissue-residency (CD103, CD49a) and dysfunction ( , ). Similar observations have been made in colorectal carcinoma (CRC), where CD49a + NK cell frequencies expand with tumor progression ( ). Additionally, recent single-cell studies mapping the transcriptional landscape of intratumoral NK cells across multiple cancer types have revealed the consistent emergence of dysfunctional, stressed, and tissue-resident phenotypes upon tumor infiltration( , – ). Despite these advances, the precise intratumoral NK cell states, along with their underlying gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and environmental cues that govern their differentiation, remain poorly understood. Gaining a deeper understanding of these mechanisms is essential for elucidating the origins of NK cell dysfunction and guiding the development of more effective NK cell-based immunotherapies.
 To address this gap, we investigated the transcriptional states, dynamics, and GRNs of NK cells from treatment-naïve NSCLC tumor samples using snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq. Our analysis identified two distinct tumor-associated (ta)NK cell states resembling NK3 cells, marked by transcriptional signatures of tissue residency, dysfunction, and adaptive features, driven at least in part by interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), in response to inflammation. Notably, a subset of CD39⁺ taNK cells co-expressed cytotoxic effector molecules and increased in response to cytokine stimulation or anti-NKG2A treatment. Together, these findings offer a detailed view of NK cell heterogeneity in NSCLC and highlight taNK cells as promising targets for immunotherapeutic intervention.

## RESULTS

## NK cells from human lung cancer exhibit substantial heterogeneity
 To investigate NK cell heterogeneity in NSCLC and the underlying GRNs shaping their functional states, we performed paired snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq using the 10x Genomics Multiome platform on CD56 + immune cells isolated from tumor resections of 11 treatment-naïve patients diagnosed with either lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD, n = 7) or lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC, n = 4) ( . S1A, table S1). After quality control and filtering, we recovered 57’854 cells, comprising T cells, NK cells, and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), with smaller populations of B cells and monocytes. NK cells were computationally enriched by removing T cells ( CD3D , CD3G score < 0.05), monocytes, B cells, and regulatory T cells. Subsequent analyses were performed following standard Seurat ( ) and Signac( ) workflows, including normalization, dimensionality reduction, batch correction, and Louvain clustering (fig. S1B-D).
 To integrate snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq modalities, we employed weighted nearest neighbor (WNN) analysis ( ), recovering 29’890 high-quality cells and identifying six distinct clusters (fig. S1E). Cluster 5, present in only one patient and characterized by a pronounced stress-associated gene expression profile ( ), was excluded due to its patient-specific nature (fig. S1E-G). The remaining five clusters were annotated based on the expression of key marker genes and chromatin accessibility in proximity to indicated genes ( . S2A). Annotations were validated using publicly available NK and ILC signatures ( , , ), identifying profiles resembling NK1, NK2, and NK3 cells in NSCLC lesions ( . S2B). NK1 cells were characterized by NKG7 and FCGR3A expression and chromatin accessibility near B3GAT1 and CX3CR1 . NK2 cells were defined by elevated levels of XCL1 and CD44 , with accessible chromatin near ZNF462 and ZNF667 . NK3 cells were marked by CD52 and IL32 expression and chromatin accessibility near CTLA4 and ITGA2 . Additionally, we observed clusters resembling ILC1s ( RORA, CD6 ) and ILC3s ( KIT, RORC ) (fig. S2A-S2B). Further comparison with published NK cell signatures revealed that NK3 cells were strongly enriched for a lung tissue-resident NK signature, indicating their potential localization within the lung tissue ( ) ( ). Consistent with previous studies ( ), the NK3 population also displayed features of adaptive NK cells( ), supporting the presence of an adaptive-like NK cell subset in human lung cancer.
 To further resolve NK cell diversity, we increased the clustering resolution and performed differential gene expression (DGE) and gene activity (gene score) analyses ( . S2C, table S2). NK1 cells segregated into two subclusters; NK1_CCL4, characterized by high expression of chemokines CCL4 and CCL3 as well as the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 ; and NK1_FGFBP2, marked by a distinct gene expression profile. The NK3 population divided into three transcriptionally distinct sub-clusters. NK3_GZMK cells expressed genes commonly associated with CD56 bright NK cells ( , ), such as CD44 , GZMK and CXCR4 , while NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 were enriched for transcripts linked to tissue-residency ( ITGAE, ITGA1, ENTPD1 ), adaptive NK cells ( CD3E, IL32 ) ( , ), and cytotoxicity ( GZMA ). These subsets also showed chromatin accessibility at loci associated with dysfunction and tumor infiltration, including CTLA4, CXCL13, and LAYN ( ) ( - ). NK_NFKB1 and the proliferating NK cluster (NK_prol) shared overlapping features with multiple NK subtypes ( ). Of note, no statistically significant association was observed between NK subset composition and NSCLC histology or tumor stage, likely due to the limited sample size (fig. S2D-S2E).
 In summary, our integrated snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq analysis revealed a complex and heterogeneous NK cell landscape in NSCLC, consisting of multiple distinct NK1, NK2, and NK3 subpopulations. Notably, the NK3 subset identified here not only mirrors circulating NK3 cells found in the peripheral blood but also exhibits unique features of tissue residency and adaptive NK cells.

## Diverse GRNs and transcriptional profiles reveal functional specialization of NK cell subsets in NSCLC
 Recognizing that marker gene expression alone provides an incomplete view of cell states, we aimed to reconstruct the transcriptional programs and GRNs that shape NK cell fate in NSCLC. We first assessed transcription factor (TF) motif accessibility, identifying binding motifs for well-established NK cell TFs, including EOMES and TBX21 , across major NK cell subsets (fig. S2F). To systematically map transcriptional regulation, we next applied SCENIC+, a multi-omics framework that integrates TF expression, enhancer accessibility, and target gene co-expression, to infer enhancer-driven GRNs ( ). This approach enabled us to define active regulatory modules across NK cell subsets, offering a functional framework of the transcriptional programs that drive NK cell diversity in lung tumors.
 Importantly, the analysis confirmed known regulatory modules, including strong RORC and AHR regulon activity in ILC3s ( ), high E2F family regulon activity in proliferating NK cells, and enrichment of NFKB1-associated regulons ( , ) in the NK_NFKB1 cluster. Notably, ILC1s displayed strong RORA regulon activity, reinforcing its utility as a distinguishing candidate GRN between NK cells and ILC1s in NSCLC ( , ). Within the NK1 clusters, as previously reported ( ), we observed enrichment of regulons associated with NK cell cytotoxicity, effector function, maturation and cytokine responsiveness, including IRF1 ( ), IRF8 ( ), PRDM1 ( ), IKZF1 ( ), highlighting their functional specialization. The NK2 subset showed enhanced activity of TCF7 ( ) and BACH2 ( ) regulons, both linked to immature NK cells. In contrast, NK3 clusters were marked by strong activity of PRDM1 , a regulon implicated in NK maturation ( ) and the NK3 phenotype ( ), and RUNX2 , previously associated with tissue residency ( ). Notably, NR3C1 , encoding the glucocorticoid receptor, was also enriched in NK3 cells, suggesting a potential mechanism of intratumoral NK cell suppression via glucocorticoid signaling ( ).
 To further elucidate the functional potential of these NK cell subsets, we categorized genes based on their roles in activation, cytotoxicity, tissue-residency, immune checkpoints and inhibitory receptors, proliferation, cytokines, and cytokine receptors ( ). NK1 and NK2 clusters mirrored transcriptional profiles previously characterized in peripheral NK cells: NK1 cells expressed a broad array of activating and cytolytic genes, as well as genes associated with tissue migration ( GZMB, FCGR2A, S1PR5 , CX3CR1 ), whereas NK2 cells expressed cytokine-producing genes ( XCL1, XCL2 ) ( , , ). In contrast, NK3 cells exhibited distinct activation-related profiles and a strong enrichment for tissue-residency-associated genes such as ITGA1 , ITGAE , RGS1 , ITGA2 , CXCR6 . Within NK3 subsets, NK3_CRTAM cells expressed CRTAM, CD44, KLRK1, as well as elevated levels of KLRC2 (NKG2C) and TNFRSF9, genes linked to adaptive NK cells ( ) and activation ( ), respectively. NK3_ENTPD1 cells expressed high levels of NCR2 and TMIGD2 , a CD28 family member known to promote NK cell proliferation and cytokine production ( , ). While cytotoxicity-related gene expression appeared reduced in NK3 cells, NK3_CRTAM cells retained IFNG expression, and NK3_ENTPD1 cells expressed GZMA , indicating effector potential. Both NK3 subsets also exhibited transcriptional hallmarks of dysfunction and chronic T cell stimulation ( ), including classical immune checkpoints such as TIGIT , CTLA4 , and LAG3 . Additionally, NK3_ENTPD1 cells expressed high levels of KLRC1 (NKG2A), a marker associated with dysfunctional intratumoral NK cells ( ), and LAYN , a gene frequently found in dysfunctional tumor-infiltrating CD8 + T cells ( ) ( ). Markers of proliferation such as MKI67 and TOP2A were also detected in both subsets, suggesting proliferative capacity.
 In regard to cytokines and chemokines, NK3 cells expressed CCL5 , which supports recruitment of CD8 + T cells and DCs ( , ), and IL32 , a cytokine involved in anti-tumor immunity ( ). Intriguingly, NK3_CRTAM cells showed high expression of CXCL13 , a chemokine enriched in tumor-reactive T cells ( , ), critical for tertiary lymphoid structure (TLS) formation ( ), and predictive for response to ICB ( , ). Additionally, NK3 cells expressed CXCR3 , a chemokine receptor that directs lymphocyte trafficking into inflamed tissues and tumors ( ). Elevated expression of CXCR6 , a molecule crucial for memory NK cell persistence ( ) and T cell-mediated tumor control ( ), was also observed, supporting its role in tissue retention of NK cells in NSCLC ( ) ( ).
 In conclusion, NK cells in NSCLC demonstrate a broad spectrum of GRNs and transcriptional programs associated with distinct functional identities. These include conventional cytotoxic NK1 and NK2 subsets, as well as functionally diverse NK3 populations with tissue-resident, adaptive, and dysfunctional features.

## Dysfunctional NK cells resembling tumor-reactive CD8 + T cells are enriched in tumor tissue
 To identify NK cell subtypes specifically associated with the TME, we integrated our snRNA-seq dataset from NSCLC with two publicly available datasets of non-tumor lung NK cells ( , ). Using the standard Seurat workflow, we obtained a combined dataset of 50’088 high-quality NK cells, comprising 20’198 from non-tumor tissues and 29,890 from tumors ( . S3A). Clustering and UMAP visualization revealed seven NK cell subsets, which were annotated based on DGEs and published NK and ILC transcriptional signatures ( , , ) (fig. S3B-S3C). Among these, a distinct NK3 cluster was exclusively present in tumor samples and characterized by high expression of ITGAE, ITGA1, and ENTPD1 ( - and fig. S3B-S3D). We designated this subset as tumor-associated NK3 (taNK3).
 Consistent with previous studies ( , , ), we observed a general shift in NK cell composition within tumors, including a reduction of NK1 cells, and a relative enrichment of NK2 and ILC1 cells ( . S3D). Notably, the taNK3 cluster showed strong overlap with the previously identified NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 clusters ( ), suggesting that these two subsets are enriched or specifically expanded in the TME. These two subclusters where thus collectively designated as taNK, and the remaining NK cell clusters were categorized as non-tumor-associated NK cells (non-taNK) (fig. S3E).
 We next compared taNK cells (NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1) to non-taNK cells to identify transcriptional features distinguishing this tumor-associated state. DGE analysis revealed that taNK cells are marked by elevated expression of genes linked to tissue-residency ( ITGAE, ITGA1, ENTPD1, RGS1 ), dysfunction ( ENTPD1, CD96, KLRC1, TOX ), cytotoxicity and inflammation ( IL32, CCL5, GZMA ), and adaptive NK cells ( KLRC2 , IRF4 ) ( , table S3). Signature enrichment analysis further confirmed that taNK cells are significantly enriched for a lung tissue-residency signature ( ), as well as gene programs characteristic of dysfunctional and exhausted CD8 + T cells ( , ) and adaptive NK cells ( ). Despite relatively low enrichment for conventional NK1 and cytotoxic gene signatures ( ), taNK cells showed strong enrichment for tumor-reactive and tissue-resident memory (T RM ) CD8 + signatures, the latter of which are linked to improved prognosis and ICB response across multiple cancer types ( – ) ( . S3F, table S4).
 To dissect the transcriptional heterogeneity within the taNK population, we directly compared NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1. NK3_CRTAM cells showed elevated expression of CRTAM ( ) and GZMH ( , ), while NK3_ENTPD1 cells expressed higher levels of GZMA and FCER1G (fig. S3G, table S5). To assess whether NK3_CRTAM resemble previously described adaptive lung NK cells ( ), we performed enrichment analysis using a human adaptive NK cell signature ( ). While not statistically significant, the analysis revealed a trend toward higher enrichment of adaptive features in NK3_CRTAM compared to NK3_ENTPD1, suggesting a closer phenotypic and transcriptional alignment with adaptive NK cells (fig. S3H).
 Finally, pathway enrichment analysis using gene ontology (GO) terms of biological processes revealed distinct functional programs across NK cell subtypes (fig. S4). Notably, both NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 clusters were enriched for pathways related to NK cell differentiation, positive regulation of cell cycle checkpoints, NK cell degranulation, and cytokine production ( ), supporting their functional relevance in tumor immunity.
 In summary, we identified NK cell subsets uniquely associated with the TME with transcriptional features of NK3 cells, characterized by tissue-resident, dysfunctional, and adaptive traits. These taNK cells also exhibit similarities to tumor-reactive CD8 + T RM cells, positioning them as potential players in the immune response to lung cancer.

## Restimulation reveals cytotoxicity of tumor-associated NK cells in lung cancer
 To validate the transcriptional profile of taNK cells at the protein level, we performed flow cytometry on NK cells isolated from an independent set of NSCLC tumor samples (n = 14), adjacent non-tumor lung tissue (n = 13), and peripheral blood (table S6). NK cells were defined as CD45 + CD14 − CD19 − CD3 − CD56 + . As CD103 ( ITGAE ) and CD49a ( ITGA1 ) were among the most differentially expressed genes distinguishing taNK cells from non-taNK cells, we used them as markers to identify taNK cells ( . S5A). This analysis confirmed a significant enrichment of CD103 + CD49a + NK cells in tumor lesions compared to adjacent non-tumor lung tissue, whereas these cells were absent in the periphery ( - and fig. S5B), highlighting their tumor-restricted localization in NSCLC.
 Consistent with our transcriptional analyses, taNK cells exhibited elevated protein levels of CCL5, granzyme A ( GZMA ), NKG2A ( KLRC1 ), NKG2C ( KLRC2 ), CD39 ( ENTPD1 ), and CTLA4, alongside reduced expression of granzyme B ( GZMB ), and CD16 ( FCGR3A ) compared to CD103 − CD49a − NK cells ( and fig. S5C).
 Given the enrichment for inhibitory receptors and effector molecules, traits shared with exhausted and tumor-reactive T cells, we assessed the functional responsiveness of taNK cells from lung tumor digests (n = 8) using either a cytokine cocktail (IL-12/IL-15/IL-18) or co-culture with irradiated K562 cells ( ). Notably, even without stimulation, CD103 + CD49a + taNK displayed higher Ki67 expression compared to CD103 − CD49a − non-taNK, consistent with elevated MKI67 and TOP2A transcripts, indicating an active cell cycle ( . S5D). While taNK cells initially showed lower or comparable expression of IFNγ, CD107a, and granzyme B compared to non-taNK cells, they matched or exceeded these levels following 24 hours of cytokine stimulation (fig. S5E). Notably, fold-change analysis revealed a significantly greater induction of CD107a, granzyme B, and Ki67 in taNK cells, suggesting that these cells are primed to respond to inflammatory cytokines ( ). However, in the K562 co-culture, only CD107a showed a significantly increased fold-change in taNK cells, indicating that direct tumor cell stimulation fails to reactivate taNK cells (fig. S5F-S5G).
 To evaluate the clinical relevance of taNK cells, we analyzed the association between the taNK signature and patient outcomes using TCGA datasets. In LUAD, high taNK signature expression correlated with significantly improved overall survival (HR = 0.237, p = 0.0022) ( . S6A), whereas no such benefit was observed in LUSC (HR = 1.03, p = 0.9) (fig. S6A-S6B). Furthermore, in an independent NSCLC cohort treated with anti-PD1 ( ), the taNK signature was significantly enriched in patients with durable clinical benefit (DCB) ( ), suggesting a potential role for taNK cells in ICB response. These findings were corroborated in independent datasets from patients with breast cancer ( ) (BRCA) and CRC ( ), where the taNK signature was also associated with therapeutic response and T cell clonal expansion (fig. S6C-S6G).
 Overall, taNK cells in NSCLC, defined by the co-expression of CD103 and CD49a, display enhanced sensitivity upon cytokine restimulation, suggesting latent functional potential. Their presence correlates with improved clinical outcomes in LUAD and may contribute to the effectiveness of ICB.

## ISGs and inflammation-associated regulons drive differentiation towards NK3_ENTPD1 cells
 Next, we aimed to elucidate the intratumoral differentiation trajectories of taNK cells. Based on our identification of NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 as tumor-associated subsets, we focused our analysis on the NK3 compartment. Reclustering of isolated NK3 cells confirmed the three previously identified subclusters NK3_GZMK, NK3_CRTAM, and NK3_ENTPD1 (fig. S7A). To infer their differentiation dynamics, we applied MultiVelocity ( ), a multi-omic extension of RNA velocity that incorporates chromatin accessibility to predict cell state transitions. This analysis revealed a bifurcated trajectory originating from NK3_GZMK, diverging towards NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 (fig. S7B). Trajectory validation using diffusion maps (Destiny ( )) confirmed this bifurcation and demonstrated continuous pseudotime progression along each branch ( ). Consistent trajectories and pseudotime patterns were also observed when using gene activity derived from ATAC data (fig. S7C-S7D).
 Given its enrichment in tumor tissue and the expression of T RM -associated genes ( ITGAE , ENTPD1 ), a T cell subset linked to favorable outcomes ( and ), we focused on the NK3_GZMK-to-NK3_ENTPD1 trajectory, identifying the top 100 genes dynamically expressed along the pseudotime axis ( ). Early in the trajectory, genes associated with a CD56 bright phenotype ( CD44 ( ) , GZMK ( ) , KLRF1 ( )) were expressed, which transitioned through interferon-stimulated genes ( ISGs: IFIT3, IFI44, ISG15 ) and GZMB, before culminating in the expression of genes linked to dysfunction ( KLRC1 ( ) , LAYN ( ) , ENTDP1 ( ) , SNX9 ( )), tissue residency ( ITGAE ), adaptive NK cells ( KLRC2 ( )), and cytotoxicity ( GZMA ). To define the GRNs governing these transitions, we conducted SCENIC+ regulon analysis on NK3 subclusters (fig. S7E). Each NK3 subset displayed a distinct regulatory profile: NK3_GZMK cells were enriched for regulons associated with immaturity, including BACH2 ( ), TCF7 ( ), as well as homeostatic regulation via KLF2 ( ). NK3_CRTAM cells exhibited regulatory programs linked to immune suppression ( NR3C1 ( )), maturation ( PRDM1 ( )) and tissue residency ( RUNX2 ( )). In contrast, the NK3_ENTPD1 cluster was characterized by GRNs associated with proliferation (E2Fs ( )), dysfunction ( NR4A1 ( , )), and adaptive or effector responses ( IRF4 ( – )).
 Pseudotime-based regulon analysis from NK3_GZMK-to-NK3_ENTPD1 revealed a shift from immature states ( TCF7, BACH2 ) toward inflammatory and tissue-adapted programs, including inflammation-associated regulons ( STAT1 ( ), NFKB family ( )), AP-1 transcription factors ( FOS, JUNB ), and tissue-residency programs ( RUNX2 ( )) ( - ).
 Altogether, integrative trajectory and regulon analyses reveal that NK3_GZMK represents an early state, giving rise to NK3_CRTAM and NK3_ENTPD1 taNK subsets along distinct transcriptional routes. The path towards NK3_ENTPD1 is characterized by ISG activation and inflammation with the sequential engagement of inflammatory, adaptive, and dysfunction-associated regulatory modules, highlighting a trajectory of intratumoral NK cell adaptation shaped by TME-mediated cues.

## CD39 + tumor-associated NK cells display enhanced cytotoxic potential
 Given the progressive acquisition of cytotoxic ( GZMA ) and inhibitory ( KLRC1 ) markers along the NK3_ENTPD1 trajectory, we next examined the functional profile of CD39 + taNK cells as their surface-defined analogs.
 Flow cytometric analysis revealed significantly higher expression levels of granzyme A in CD103⁺CD49⁺CD39⁺ NK cells compared to their CD39⁻ counterparts, along with a trend toward increased granzyme A⁺ cell frequency ( . S8A). These findings suggest a potential link between CD39 expression and enhanced cytotoxic capacity in taNK cells.
 To assess functional responsiveness, we stimulated taNK cells from NSCLC tumor lesions for 5 and 24 hours with either IL-12/IL-15/IL-18 or co-cultured them with K562 tumor cells ( and ). After 5 hours, CD39⁺ taNK cells showed a significantly higher frequency of Ki67⁺ cells under both conditions, indicating a greater proliferative potential associated with CD39 expression (fig. S8B-S8C). After 24 hours, CD39 + taNK cells exhibited significantly increased expression of granzyme B, Ki67, and CD107a, further highlighting their superior functional capacity ( ). Under cytokine stimulation, we also observed a patient-dependent trend toward higher expression of CCL5, granzyme A, and IFNγ in CD39 + taNK cells, a pattern less evident under K562 co-culture conditions ( - , fig. S8D).
 Collectively, these findings indicate that CD39 expression marks a functionally distinct subpopulation of taNK cells with elevated cytotoxic and proliferative potential, particularly upon cytokine restimulation.

## CD39 + tumor-associated NK cells with cytotoxic potential emerge upon anti-NKG2A treatment
 Given the elevated expression of KLRC1 (NKG2A) within taNK cells, particularly in the NK3_ENTPD1 cluster ( and ), we next explored the impact of anti-NKG2A treatment on CD39 + taNK cells. Co-expression analysis confirmed that cells expressing KLRC1 (NKG2A), ENTPD1 (CD39), ITGAE (CD103), and ITGA1 (CD49a) were most enriched in NK3_ENTPD1 and, to a lesser extent, in NK3_CRTAM, and NKprol clusters ( ). Flow cytometry further validated significantly higher NKG2A protein levels in CD39 + taNK compared to CD39 − taNK cells ( ).
 To evaluate whether anti-NKG2A treatment could selectively enhance the function of CD39 + taNK cells, we employed the patient-derived tumor fragment (PDTF) platform, an ex vivo 3D model that preserves the native cellular architecture and immune microenvironment of human lung tumors ( ). PDTFs from NSCLC patients (n = 7, table S6) were treated for 48 hours with isotype control or anti-NKG2A, a biosimilar to Monalizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting NKG2A currently under investigation in phase 3 trials for NSCLC ( NCT05221840 ). Post-treatment, PDTFs were pooled by condition, digested, and analyzed by flow cytometry ( ). Anti-NKG2A treatment resulted in a reduction of NKG2A surface expression on both, CD39 + and CD39 − taNK cells, indicating successful target engagement (fig. S8E).
 Notably, anti-NKG2A treatment led to a significant increase in the proportion of CD39⁺ NK cells expressing GZMB or GZMA, while the CD39⁻ subset remained largely unchanged ( , fig. S8F-S8G). When specifically gating on CD39⁺ cells, only GZMA showed a significant increase, suggesting a preferential upregulation of GZMA upon anti-NKG2A engagement (fig. S8H).
 These findings identify CD39⁺ taNK cells as a tumor-enriched NK cell population that is functionally responsive to NKG2A blockade. Anti-NKG2A therapy either expands existing CD39⁺GZMA⁺ and CD39⁺GZMB⁺ populations or promotes their induction from CD39⁻ precursors, thus enhancing their cytotoxic potential.

## DISCUSSION
 Despite increasing efforts to develop NK cell-based immunotherapies ( ), the transcriptional and functional states of intratumoral NK cells remain largely unknown. Here, we present a comprehensive snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq atlas of NK cell states from human lung cancer. Our analyses reveal two clusters of taNK cells, defined by the co-expression of ITGAE (CD103) and ITGA1 (CD49a). These clusters resemble NK3 and adaptive NK cells and co-express markers of dysfunction ( ENTPD1, CD96, TOX, KLRC1 ), together with inflammatory cytokines and effector molecules ( CCL5, KLRC2, GZMA, IL32 ). In particular, we identified a CD39⁺ taNK population (equivalent to NK3_ENTPD1) that likely emerges from GZMK + NK cells in response to inflammatory signals. Notably, taNK cells exhibit functional plasticity, with cytokine stimulation or anti-NKG2A treatment inducing cytotoxic functions and proliferation, particularly within the CD39 + subset.
 Although NK cell dysfunction in tumors is well-documented ( ), the co-expression of tissue-residency (e.g. CD103, CD49a, CXCR6) and dysfunction-associated markers has only recently been recognized across multiple cancer types ( , , ). Cytokines such as IL-15 and TGF-β can drive this tissue-resident phenotype ( , ), potentially accompanied with an intratumoral maturation to NK3-like and adaptive-like NK cells. Our findings highlight that despite expressing markers of dysfunction, human taNK cells remain responsive to cytokine stimulation, consistent with features of adaptive-like NK cells in the lungs ( ). Comparable plasticity has been observed in lymphoma mouse models, where immune checkpoint-expressing NK cells recover functionality upon cytokine stimulation and tumor cell removal ( ). Together, our results reinforce the concept that NK cell dysfunction is not fixed but context-dependent and reversible.
 Trajectory analysis revealed a bifurcated differentiation from GZMK ⁺ NK cells toward either ENTPD1 ⁺ or CRTAM ⁺ fates. While their exact origin remains unresolved, both circulating and pre-existing tissue-resident NK cells may contribute. Notably, recent murine studies suggest that resident-memory NK cells can persist in tissues long after infection clearance ( – ). Similarly, in the human lung, a site of frequent pathogen exposure, Brownlie et al. identified a hyperresponsive, adaptive-like NK cell population marked by elevated CD49a expression ( ). As CRTAM ⁺ NK cells exhibit stronger enrichment for adaptive NK cell signatures and only partially enrich in tumor tissue ( . S3H), this subset may represent a tissue-resident, adaptive-like subset that expands upon tumor progression. However, this interpretation remains speculative and warrants further investigation. In contrast, ENTPD1 ⁺ NK cells predominate in tumors and show a transcriptional transition toward a CD39⁺ state, marked by ISG activation, cytotoxicity, and inflammatory transcriptional regulators. This progression involves acquisition of tissue-residency features and is further shaped by upregulation of GRNs linked to dysfunction ( NR4A ) ( ), proliferation (E2Fs), cytotoxicity, and adaptive-like immunity ( IRF4, BATF, PRDM1 ). Intriguingly, many of these regulons are shared with exhausted or tumor-reactive T cells ( , ). For instance, NR4A1 drives T cell exhaustion via suppression of AP1-mediated activation ( ), while IRF4 is implicated in both, NK and T cell activation, proliferation, and effector function ( , , ). These parallels suggest that NK and T cells may converge on shared transcriptional programs in response to an inflammatory tumor milieu.
 Functionally, CD39 + taNK cells express elevated levels of granzyme A, NKG2A, and proliferation markers, and exhibit increased cytotoxic potential upon cytokine stimulation. The co-expression of CD39 with both, activation markers and immune checkpoints, suggests that CD39 marks a responsive effector NK population upregulating checkpoints as a means of immunoregulatory adaptation. Their transcriptional and phenotypic resemblance to CD103 + CD39 + tumor-reactive CD8 + T RM cells, which are functionally responsive despite immune checkpoint expression and are enriched following ICB ( – , – ), raises the question of how NK cells acquire transcriptional features typically attributed to TCR-dependent signaling. It remains to be determined which activating receptors or cytokine cues orchestrate similar programs in NK cells.
 Therapeutically, using the PDTF platform, we demonstrate that NKG2A blockade enriches CD39 + taNK cells with cytotoxic features. These findings highlight CD39 + taNK cells as a potential therapeutic target for ICB. Beyond NKG2A, CD39 itself may be a promising target, as its inhibition has been shown to boost intratumoral NK cell infiltration ( ) and promote T cell activation and proliferation within tumors ( ). Ongoing trials targeting the adenosine pathway, including CD39, are showing promise, particularly with PD-1 blockade ( , ). Evaluating NK cell dynamics in these studies may yield important insights into the therapeutic modulation of taNK cells. Moreover, strategies that promote tissue residency in NK cell therapies, analogous to CAR T cell engineering, may improve NK cell retention, persistence, and function ( ). While PDTFs provide a valuable ex vivo platform that preserves native tumor architecture and immune-tumor interactions, they represent a semi-physiological, closed system that does not fully recapitulate systemic influences ( ). Future in vivo studies will be essential to validate these findings, particularly to confirm the direct cytotoxic capacity of taNK cells following therapeutic intervention.
 In conclusion, our study provides an in-depth transcriptional and epigenetic atlas of NK cell states in human lung cancer, uncovers a CD39⁺ tumor-associated population with adaptive-like features and intrinsic cytotoxic potential, and demonstrates its further enrichment exhibiting cytotoxic features upon cytokine stimulation and ICB. These insights offer new avenues for leveraging NK cells in cancer immunotherapy and highlight CD39⁺ taNK cells as a promising therapeutic target.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Study design
 This study aimed to investigate the functional specialization and heterogeneity of intratumoral NK cells in treatment-naïve patients with NSCLC using a multiomic single-nucleus approach (snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq). Patients with either LUAD or LUSC across different stages, including both sexes and smokers and non-smokers, were selected, and samples were prescreened to ensure sufficient NK cell numbers for single-cell profiling. Key findings from the single-nucleus analysis were validated at the protein level in additional NSCLC and non-tumor lung samples, and functional and therapeutic potential was further assessed using 2D assays and the 3D patient-derived PDTF platform. Overall analyses included multiomic single-nucleus profiling, multiparameter flow cytometry, and in vitro assays, including PDTF co-cultures, to evaluate the therapeutic relevance of identified NK cell populations. Investigators were not blinded to group assignments during experiments or analyses. Although statistical methods were not used to pre-determine sample size, sample sizes were chosen based on previously published results. Replication varied by experiment: multiomic single-nucleus sequencing was performed on eleven patient samples; protein-level validation included fourteen NSCLC and non-tumor lung samples; functional 2D assays were performed using eight patient samples, while PDTF assays were performed using seven patient samples.

## Tumor sample collection
 Fresh tumor samples were collected from NSCLC patients undergoing primary surgical treatment at University Hospital Basel or Kantonsspital Baselland Liestal, Switzerland. The study was approved by the local Ethical Review Board (Ethikkommission Nordwestschweiz, EK321/10), performed in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations, and all patients consented in writing to the analysis of their tumor samples. Patient characteristics are summarized in table S1 and S6.

## Isolation of human PBMCs and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
 Resected tumor lesions and PDTFs were enzymatically dissociated into single-cell suspensions using Accutase (Innovative Cell Technologies), collagenase type IV (Worthington), hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich), and DNase type I (Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, cells were washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and filtered using a 100 μM filter mesh. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by density gradient centrifugation, using Histopaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich). Resulting single cell suspensions (tumor digests) were cryopreserved in fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Pan Biotech) and 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma), and stored in liquid nitrogen until further usage. The dissociation protocol was optimized to preferentially preserve immune cell populations, tumor cells are less likely to remain viable following the enzymatic digestion and subsequent cryopreservation.

## PDTF assays
 Obtained tumor lesions collected for PDTF cultures were cut into small tumor fragments of 1 – 2 mm 3 size on ice as reported in Roelofsen et al. ( ). Subsequently, single PDTFs were mixed to ensure uniform representation of the tumor lesions and were cryopreserved until further use. For the assays, individual PDTFs were embedded in artificial extracellular matrix consistent of sodium bicarbonate (1.1% final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich), collagen I (1 mg/mL final concentration; Corning), tumor medium (DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 1 mM of sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich), 1X MEM nonessential amino acids (Gibco), 2 mM of L-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10% FBS (PAN Biotech), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) and 50 µM β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco)), and ice-cold Cultrex UltiMatrix BME (Bio-Techne). All components were kept ice-cold to avoid pre-mature solidification of the collagen. PDTFs were slowly thawed at 37 °C and washed in tumor medium multiple times by flushing them through a 100 µm cell strainer. One PDTF per well was placed on top of the pre-solidified matrix (15 min at 37 °C for solidification), after which a second layer of matrix was added. Plates were then incubated at 37 °C for another 15 min. After solidification, tumor medium supplemented with either anti-NKG2A (10 µg/mL, Ichorbio), or Isotype control (human IgG4, QA16A15: 10 µg/mL, Biolegend) was added. Ten to fifteen PDTFs were used per condition and cultures were incubated at 37 °C for 48 hours. 10 hours before harvest, a Brefeldin A (1:1000, eBioscience) and Monensin (1:1000, eBioscience) mix was added to block cytokine secretion. For flow cytometry, PDTFs were processed into single-cell suspensions by enzymatic digestion, washed in PBS and filtered using a 100 μM filter mesh.

## Flow cytometry
 Tumor digests were centrifuged at 400 g for 5 minutes (min) in 96-well V-bottom plates. Subsequently, cells were washed with PBS, stained with fixable live/dead Zombie dyes (BioLegend) for 20 min at 4 °C in PBS. After two washing steps using PBS, cells were blocked with a human Fc receptor binding inhibitor (Invitrogen) for another 20 min at 4 °C in PBS. After further centrifugation, cell surface antigens using fluorophore-conjugated anti-human Abs (table S7) diluted in flow cytometry buffer (1X PBS, 0.5 mM EDTA, 2% fetal calf serum, 1% sodium azide (NaN 3 )), for 20 min at 4 °C. After two washes with FACS buffer, cells were permeabilized and fixed for intranuclear staining using Fixation/Perm diluent (Invitrogen) and then stained intranuclearly with antibody cocktails in 1X Permeabilization buffer (Invitrogen). After two washes with Permeabilization buffer, the samples were resuspended in flow cytometry buffer and acquired using Aurora (Cytek). FlowJo (V.10.10.0) was used for analysis.

## Functional assays
 Whole tumor digests were incubated for 5 or 24 hours either alone, at a ratio of 1:1 with the irradiated target cell line K562 (90 Gy), or with a cytokine cocktail (IL-12: 1 ng/ml, PeproTech; IL-15: 10 ng/ml, PeproTech; IL-18: 5 ng/ml, Gibco) at a density of 1×10 6 cells/mL per well in cell culture media (RPMI 1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 1 mM of sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich), 1X MEM nonessential amino acids (Gibco), 2 mM HEPES (Gibco), 10% heat-inactivated human serum (Blood Bank, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) and 50 µM β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco)). Four hours before harvest, a media mix consistent of CD107a-APC-H7 (1:150, Biolegend, H4A3), Brefeldin A (1:1000, eBiosciences), and Monensin (1:1000, eBiosciences) was added to block cytokine secretion. Subsequently, cells were harvested and stained for flow cytometry.

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting for the single-cell experiment
 Tumor digests were thawed, washed with PBS, and stained according to the flow cytometry protocol mentioned above. For live/dead staining the Zombie NIR fixable viability kit (Biolegend, 1:1000) was used. After human Fc receptor binding inhibitor (Invitrogen) incubation, cells were stained in staining buffer (PBS + 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma)) containing antibodies (CD45-BV711: H130, Biolegend; CD8-BV421:SK7, Biolegend; CD8-APC: SK1, Biolegend, CD19-FITC: HIB19, Biolegend; CD14-FITC: M5E2, Biolegend, CD56-PE: 5.1H11, Biolegend). Cells were washed twice with staining buffer. Subsequently, Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was performed using BD Melody or BD FACS Aria III. Cells were gated on single cells, live (Zombie NIR − ), CD45 + , CD19 − CD14 − and CD56 + CD3 + . Cells were sorted in cold PBS with 2% FBS (Pan Biotech) and used immediately for the single cell experiment.

## Single cell library preparation and sequencing
 Sorted single-cell suspensions were further processed using the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression protocol (CG000338, Rev C) provided by 10x Genomics according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First, nuclei Isolation was performed using the Nuclei Isolation protocol for primary cells for Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression Sequencing (CG000365, Rev B) provided by 10x Genomics. Most reagents were used as recommended by indicated protocol (BSA (Sigma), Nonidet P40 substitute (Sigma), Tween-20 (Sigma), DTT (Sigma)). Lysis was performed using the lysis buffer at 0.5X for 3 min. Subsequently, nuclei transposition was conducted and nuclei were loaded in a 10x Genomics Chip J to achieve a target recovery of approximately 10’000 cells for each sample. Cell-barcoded 3′ gene expression (GEX) libraries and ATAC libraries were sequenced using the Illumina NovaSeq6000 system at recommended sequencing depths (GEX: 20’000 reads per nucleus, ATAC: 25’000 reads per nucleus). GEX and ATAC libraries were aligned and annotated with CellRanger ARC v.2.0.2 using the human reference genome GRCh38 2020-A-2.0.0 provided by 10x Genomics.

## Single cell data analysis
 The read count matrices were processed and analyzed using R v4.3.0 or higher, Signac v1.14.0 ( ), and Seurat v5.1.0 ( ), with provided standard workflows using default parameters for all functions unless otherwise specified. Peak calling was performed using MACS2 v2.2.7.1 ( ). Peak sets called from different donors were reduced to a joint peak set. For quality control, cells were filtered based on ATAC and GEX parameters (ATAC: nFeatures > 200, nCount > 1’000 & < 100’000, nucleosome signal < 2, TSS enrichment > 1, blacklist fraction < 0.05, fraction of reads in peaks per cell (FRiP) > 0.25; GEX: nFeatures > 200, nCount > 1’000 & < 25’000, percent mitochondrial genes < 20, percent ribosomal genes > 0.05). Next, GEX count matrices were log-normalized, scaled and integrated using canonical correlation analysis (CCA) in order to remove donor-specific alterations. Further, peak matrices were normalized, and donor-specific batch effects were corrected by projecting into a low dimensional space (LSI). Subsequently, WNN integration was performed in order to integrated RNA and ATAC modalities using the integrated dimensional reductions. After clustering and UMAP representation, differential gene expression (DEG) analyses were conducted with the Seurat implemented function FindAllMarkers using the MAST ( ) test. Clusters corresponding to regulatory T cells ( FOXP3 , CD4 , CTLA4 , IL2RA ), B cells/plasma cells ( CD79A, MZB1, JCHAIN ) and monocytes ( CST3 , FCER1A , XCR1 , LYZ, CD86 ) were removed to clean the dataset. Moreover, a signature score for T cells ( CD3D , CD3G ) was calculated using the AddModuleScore_UCell function from the UCell package ( ) (v2.6.2) in order to identify T cells. Cells with a signature score higher than 0.05 were removed from the dataset in order to obtain a clean NK cell dataset. Subsequently, aforementioned steps (normalization, scaling, integration, dimensional reduction, and clustering) were repeated for the purified NK cell dataset. For scaling, percentage of mitochondrial genes were regressed. Additionally, genes irrelevant for clustering, such as histone genes and ribosomal genes were excluded from variable features using a gene blacklist from Zheng et al. ( ). For clustering and UMAP calculations, the first 15 principal components (PCs) were used for the RNA dataset and the first 20 PCs for the ATAC dataset based on variance calculations. Cluster annotations and subset identifications were performed using DEG analysis and calculations of signature scores from publicly available datasets (“dysfunctional” ( ), “exhausted” ( ), “cytotoxic” ( ), “tumor-reactive” ( ), “resident-memory” ( ), “terminally exhausted” ( ) CD8, ILC signatures ( ), NK signatures( , , ), stress signature ( )) using the UCell package (v2.6.2) and the escape v1.12.0 ( ) package. Gene counts were aggregated using Seurat-implemented function AggregateExpression. For the heatmap visualization of gene transcripts of aggregated counts, only transcripts were selected that were present in more than 10% of the cells of at least one cluster. ClusterProfiler ( ) was used to perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Pathway enrichment analysis of biological processed (BP) of immune-relevant gene ontology (GO) was performed using gene set variation analysis (GSVA) of the GSVA packages ( ). The aforementioned analysis steps were repeated on the subset of NK3 cells, beginning with dataset normalization.

## Integration with non-tumor lung
 Non-tumor lung datasets were obtained from Sikkema et al. ( ) (data available at cellxgene) and Bischoff et al. ( ) (data available at code ocean capsule). For Sikkema et al. , only normal lung tissue was selected and NK cells were extracted from the dataset using the dataset annotation. For Bischoff et al. , normal lung tissue datasets were downloaded, the dataset processed using the standard Seurat workflow and NK cells were subsetted based clusters expressing NCAM1, NKG7 and GNLY , while negative for CD3D and CD3G. Subsequently, the RNA dataset of our lung tumor NK cells was extracted, all datasets merged, the count matrices for each donor and dataset log-normalized, scaled, and CCA integrated as mentioned above. 15 PCs were used for clustering and dimensional reduction and clusters were annotated using DEG analysis and signature scoring as mentioned above.

## Regulon analysis (SCENIC+)
 Briefly, SCENIC+ ( ) is a recent development of the SCENIC tool that takes advantage of multi-omic data. It predicts genomic enhancers along with candidate upstream TF and links these enhancers to candidate target genes. Specific TFs for each cell subset are thus predicted based on the concordance of TF binding site accessibility, TF expression, and target gene expression as contained in multi-omic data (scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq).
 For SCENIC+ analysis, scRNA-seq data was preprocessed using Seurat as previously described and scATAC-seq data was processed using pycisTopic (v2.0a0) as described here: https://pycistopic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/human_cerebellum.html . We filtered cells based on both, scRNA-seq (as described above) and scATAC-seq analysis (thresholds were automatically defined by the pycistopic qc function). A model of 40 topics was selected for both, the complete NK cells dataset and the NK3 cells only. PycisTopic ( ) (v2.0a0) was used to binarize the topics and identify differentially accessible regions between cell types. A custom cisTarget database was then generated based on the consensus peak detected in our datasets using as described here: https://scenicplus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/human_cerebellum_ctx_db.html#Creating-custom-cistarget-database . Next, pycistarget was applied to identify enriched motifs in the identified candidate enhancer regions using the custom cisTarget database. Finally, enhancer-driven gene regulatory networks were inferred using SCENIC+ (v1.0a1) as described here: https://scenicplus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/human_cerebellum.html#Running-SCENIC . Regulon specificity scores (RSS) were computed using the Jensen-Shannon Divergence ( ). When exploring the inferred regulons within the entire NK cell dataset or the NK3 cells only, we identified 104 and 125 active TFs, among which 47 and 58 were activators (i.e., associated with increased chromatin accessibility and RNA expression of the target genes), respectively.

## MultiVelocity analysis
 MultiVelo ( ) (v0.1.5) was used to infer velocity trajectory based on both RNA expression and ATAC. Briefly, MultiVelo employs a probabilistic latent variable model to estimate gene regulatory switch times and rate parameters, offering a quantitative framework to capture the temporal dynamics between epigenomic and transcriptomic changes. When applied to single-cell multi-omic datasets, MultiVelo reveals two distinct chromatin accessibility–driven regulatory mechanisms, quantifies concordance or discordance between transcriptomic and epigenomic states at the single-cell level, and infers time lags between these molecular layers.
 The analysis was performed on the NK3 subset pooled across all samples, as detailed below: https://multivelo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/MultiVelo_Demo.html . For the RNA part, low quality cells were filtered based on their RNA (minimal number of counts = 300, maximum number of counts = 4000). Data were normalized and only the top 1000 variable genes were retained for downstream analysis. For the ATAC analysis, peaks were aggregated using the aggregate_peaks_10x function. Outlier cells were removed based on their total number of detected peaks, with a minimum threshold of 2,000 and a maximum of 35,000. Only cells that passed both filtering steps were retained for downstream analysis. Chromatin accessibility data were smoothed using the knn_smooth_chrom function, and WNN neighbors computed with Seurat were used in subsequent steps. The joint chromatin-RNA model was then optimized using the recover_dynamics_chrom function, followed by computation of the velocity graph with velocity_graph , both using default parameters.

## Inference of genes and eRegulons evolution along the trajectory
 To validate the identified transcriptional trajectories and gain deeper insight into the transition from NK3_GZMK to NK3_ENTPD1, we performed pseudotime analysis of these populations using Monocle3 ( ) (v1.3.1) on all samples combined. The learn_graph function was run with the parameter ‘ncenter = 100’ to prevent over-branching of the trajectory. The starting point was defined as the terminal branch within the NK3_GZMK population, based on MultiVelocity and diffusion map analyses. Pseudotime was then computed using the order_cells function.
 To identify genes and regulons correlated with pseudotime progression along the principal graph, we performed Moran’s I test. The top 100 genes with a q-value < 0.05 and the highest Moran’s I scores were selected and visualized along pseudotime (z-scored expression) using the Heatmap function from the ComplexHeatmap library (v2.6.2). For regulon analysis, we focused specifically on activators (i.e., those associated with increased chromatin accessibility and upregulation of target gene expression).

## Diffusion map analysis
 Diffusion-map algorithms implemented in the R package destiny ( ) (v3.4.0) were used to infer pseudotime. The analysis was performed separately on RNA expression ( and ) and GeneActivity scores inferred from ATAC data (fig. S7C and S7D) in NK3 cells pooled from all samples. For the RNA analysis, diffusion map embedding was performed using the variable genes identified during NK3 preprocessing. For GeneActivity, the analysis was conducted on the top 5% most frequently shared features across cells. To prevent individual batch effect (at the sample level), the RunFastMNN function implemented in the R package batchelor ( ) (v1.6.3) was used. The corrected expression matrix was then used as input to generate diffusion maps using the DiffusionMap function, with the parameters set to censor_val = 30 and censor_range = c( , ). The Destiny algorithm automatically identified three ‘root’ cells. For the ATAC based Gene Activity, the first diffusion component was removed as it was correlated with quality of sequencing and therefore noised the diffusion analysis. The main root was selected from the NK3_GZMK cluster, at the beginning of the directed streamline inferred by MultiVelocity. Diffusion pseudotime for all cells was then calculated using the DPT function.

## Overall survival analysis
 Expression data of TCGA and clinical information for LUAD and LUSC were downloaded using the TCGAbiolinks ( ) v2.32.0. NK expression matrix was deconvoluted by BayesPrism ( ) v.2.2.2 using the single cell dataset from Kim et al. ( ) (GSE131907) as reference to score the signature genes (top 10) identified in taNK cells. The patients were assigned as high (top 25%) and low (bottom 25%). The Cox proportional hazards model was used implemented in the R package survival ( ) v3.7-0. Next, the survival curves were generated using the Kaplan–Meier formula. For plotting, the ggsurvplot function of the survminer ( ) v.0.4.9 package was used.

## Re-analysis of published datasets with response information to ICB
 Published bulkRNA and scRNA-seq data of cancer patients with information about response to ICB were downloaded (bulkRNA: Jung et al. ( ) (GSE135222), Chen et al. ( ) (GSE236581), Bassez et al. ( ) ( http://biokey.lambrechtslab.org/ )). Analyses of single cell datasets were performed using the standard Seurat workflow, NK cells were extracted based on published dataset annotations and enrichment of taNK cells (top 30 genes) per patient was performed using the UCell and escape v1.12.0 ( ) package. The NK matrix was deconvoluted from the bulk RNA-seq datasets as mentioned above using the BayesPrism package. The maxRank was increased to 2000 genes for the enrichment analysis of bulkRNA datasets.

## Visualizations
 Heatmaps were plotted using the R package ComplexHeatmap ( ) v2.20.0, volcano plots with the R package EnhancedVolcano ( ) v1.22.0 and boxplots using ggplot2 v3.5.1. Furthermore, the package DittoSeq ( ) was used. Schematic workflows were illustrated using Biorender.com. Flow cytometry plots were generated using GraphPad Prism v10.3.0 and FlowJo v10.10.0.

## Statistical analysis
 The R package ggsignif ( ) v0.6.4 and GraphPad Prism v10.3.0 were used to calculate statistical significances. These analyses included Wilcoxon signed-rank test, non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test with post-hoc Dunn test, and paired Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test as described in the Fig. legends. P values > 0.05 were considered not significant, and P values < 0.05 were considered significant: * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, and **** P < 0.0001.

## Supplementary Materials
 Figs. S1 to S8
 Tables S1 to S7

## Supporting information
 DC1 Supplementary Material